Enhanced Dynamic Beamwidth Selection-based THz MAC Protocol
for Wireless Data Center Networks⋆
Muhammad Absaruddina,∗, Saim Ghafoora and Mubashir Husain Rehmanib
aDepartment of Computing, Atlantic Technological University, Donegal, Ireland
bDepartment of Computer Science, Munster Technological University, Cork, Ireland
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
Beamwidth
Dynamic beamwidth
Medium Access Control (MAC) proto-
col
Terahertz
Wireless Data Center
A B S T R A C T
Terahertz (THz) wireless communication oﬀers a promising alternative to traditional wired links in
data centres (DCs), enabling ultra-high data rates, low latency, and greater scalability. However, THz
signals suﬀer from high path loss, necessitating the use of directional antennas (DAs). While DAs
enhance signal strength, they introduce challenges such as deafness and synchronisation, typically
addressed through receiver-initiated MAC protocols. Most existing THz MAC protocols use ﬁxed
beamwidths, which results in a key performance trade-oﬀ: narrow beams improve gain for long-range
links but reduce throughput for short distances due to increased alignment overhead, while wide beams
beneﬁt short links but degrade performance over longer distances. To overcome this limitation, we
propose DBS-ADAPT, a dynamic beamwidth selection-based MAC protocol that adjusts the antenna
beamwidth according to the distance between nodes, maximising throughput without compromising
link range. We also introduce an enhanced version, EDBS-ADAPT, which further reduces beamwidth
switching and control overhead while preserving throughput gains. Both protocols are evaluated using
the NS-3 THz module. Simulation results show that DBS-ADAPT improves average throughput by
up to 22% and reduces delay up to 10% compared to the baseline ADAPT-3 protocol. EDBS-ADAPT
further cuts beamwidth switching overhead by 95%, making it more eﬃcient for scalable and high-
performance wireless DC environments.
1. Introduction
Data centre (DC) traﬃc has been growing exponentially,
driving an urgent need for higher bandwidth and more eﬃ-
cient data transmission [2]. Traditional wired infrastructure
and network topologies struggle to keep pace with these
demands due to their high deployment and maintenance
costs, physical space requirements, and limited ﬂexibility in
reconﬁguration. In contrast, wireless communication tech-
nologies oﬀer a more ﬂexible, scalable, and cost-eﬀective
alternative. They also enable dynamic resource allocation
and improved adaptability compared to ﬁxed wired links [3],
[4].
Several wireless technologies have been explored for
DC applications, including millimeter-wave (mmWave) [5],
optical wireless communication (OWC)[6], and Terahertz
(THz) communication [3]]. Among these, THz communi-
cation stands out as a highly promising candidate due to its
ability to support ultra-high data rates and wide bandwidth,
while oﬀering enhanced physical-layer security compared to
mmWave. Unlike OWC, THz communication experiences
lower beam spreading and penetration losses, and requires
less precise alignment, making it more robust to beam mis-
alignment and tracking errors, which are key considerations
in dynamic DC environments. Moreover, OWC systems are
⋆A preliminary version of this paper has been published in 20th
International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking
and Communications (WiMob 2024) Paris, France, October 2024 [1].
This research was supported by Presidents Research Bursary Scholar-
ship Award oﬀered by Atlantic Technological University, Donegal, Ireland.
∗Corresponding author
L00177821@atu.ie (M. Absaruddin)
ORCID(s): 0000-0001-6569-6430 (M. Absaruddin)
more vulnerable to environmental challenges such as at-
mospheric absorption, turbulence, scintillation, and ambient
light interference, which can signiﬁcantly impair perfor-
mance in practical settings [7], [8], [9], [10].
Terahertz wireless links in data centres enable terabit-
per-second (Tbps) data rates, ultra-high throughput, and low
latency [9], [11]. They also support ﬂexible, energy-eﬃcient
topologies that reduce deployment costs [12], [13], [14]. In
DC environments, THz links can be used for both inter-rack
(between Top-of-Rack switches) and intra-rack (within a
rack) communication [15]. However, THz bands suﬀer from
severe path losses, up to 82 dB at 300 GHz over just 1 meter,
with losses increasing at higher frequencies and distances
[9]. These losses can be mitigated using highly directional
antennas (DAs) at both transmitter and receiver ends [8],
[16], [17]. Directional antennas are essential in THz commu-
nication due to their ability to provide high antenna gain, im-
prove signal-to-noise ratio, and reduce interference through
spatially conﬁned beams [3]. These beneﬁts enhance link
reliability, spectral eﬃciency, and energy eﬃciency while
supporting secure and high-capacity communication.
While essential for overcoming high path loss, DAs
introduce several challenges. These include beam misalign-
ment, directional deafness, and high overhead for beam
training and tracking in static as well as dynamic and mobile
scenarios [18], [13], [9]. Directional THz links are also
highly susceptible to blockage and require precise synchro-
nisation between nodes, complicating medium access con-
trol (MAC) and increasing protocol complexity in dense
networks. These issues necessitate redesigning link-layer
protocols to ensure robust and low-latency communication.
Although rotating directional antennas can help address
M. Absaruddin et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 1 of 17
arXiv:2607.17996v1  [cs.NI]  20 Jul 2026
Enhanced Dynamic Beamwidth Selection-based THz MAC Protocol for Wireless Data Center Networks
some of the challenges while increasing the beneﬁts and
usage. They introduced challenges such as frequent beam
misalignment, increased overhead of beam tracking and
switching, synchronisation diﬃculties, link stability, beam
adjustment for coverage, and beam parameters optimisation.
These trade-oﬀs require careful protocol design to balance
improved coverage and ﬂexibility against increased com-
plexity and energy consumption [19], [20], [9], [13].
Traditionally, MAC protocol design has concentrated on
managing contention among nodes competing for channel
access. However, in terahertz communications, the emphasis
shifts toward MAC protocols that incorporate scheduling
and coordination [13], [14]. In THz communication, we
mainly have a transmitter (Tx) and a receiver (Rx) initiated
MAC protocols [13]. Tx-initiated THz MAC protocols de-
pend on the sender to start communication, which can cause
higher collision rates in highly directional environments. In
contrast, receiver-initiated protocols improve coordination
and reduce unnecessary transmissions by having the receiver
manage link establishment, helping address beam alignment
and deafness challenges [13].
The existing receiver-initiated THz MAC protocols [21],
[18], [22], [23], [24] predominantly use ﬁxed beamwidth
antennas, without accounting for beamwidth dynamics.
However, beamwidth selection presents important trade-
oﬀs: wider beams oﬀer higher throughput and lower delay
but at the expense of reduced range, whereas narrower
beams provide longer range but result in lower throughput
and higher delay [25]. Using a ﬁxed beamwidth limits the
ability of nodes to adapt to varying distances, leading to
suboptimal performance, particularly in terms of throughput
and latency. To communicate eﬃciently, nodes should dy-
namically adjust their beamwidth based on distance; yet, cur-
rent receiver-initiated protocols do not incorporate distance-
aware beamwidth adaptation. A balanced strategy is needed
for beamwidth selection during the initial (discovery) and
transmission stage [25].
To enable dynamic beamwidth selection, we previously
proposed a protocol called Dynamic Beamwidth Selection-
based THz MAC protocol (DBS-ADAPT) [1], designed to
enhance the performance of the existing receiver-initiated
THz MAC protocol, ADAPT. DBS-ADAPT demonstrated
improved average throughput and reduced average delay
by allowing both client and Access Point (AP) nodes to
use wider beamwidths during the data transmission phase
[1]. Despite its advantages, DBS-ADAPT has certain lim-
itations: it incurs signiﬁcant overhead due to frequent an-
tenna beamwidth switching and control packets transmis-
sion and involves repeated beamwidth selection processes.
In this paper, we present an enhanced version of DBS-
ADAPT, called EDBS-ADAPT, which signiﬁcantly reduces
beamwidth switching and control overhead while maintain-
ing the throughput and delay beneﬁts of the original proto-
col. In our earlier work, a bit error rate (BER) of 10−6 was
assumed, which negatively impacted the overall reliability
and Quality of Service (QoS) for data centres. Furthermore,
the protocol was based on physical layer parameters from the
now-outdated IEEE 802.15.3e-2017 THz standard, and its
performance was not evaluated under realistic, bursty traﬃc
patterns typically observed in DC environments.
1.1. Contributions
The main contributions of our work are summarised as
follows:
1. Dynamic Beamwidth Selection protocol: In this
work, we propose a dynamic beamwidth selection pro-
tocol for terahertz (THz)-based data center networks,
referred to as DBS-ADAPT. This protocol is designed
to enhance link performance by adaptively adjusting
the beamwidth according to the distance between
nodes. The foundational version of this protocol was
initially introduced in [1], where its core mechanisms
and preliminary results were discussed.
2. Proposal of EDBS-ADAPT for Improved Eﬃciency:
To address the limitations identiﬁed in DBS-ADAPT,
we propose an Enhanced Dynamic Beamwidth Selection-
based THz MAC protocol (EDBS-ADAPT). Designed
speciﬁcally for DC environments, EDBS-ADAPT
signiﬁcantly reduces antenna beamwidth switching
and control overhead by eliminating the repetition
of the beamwidth selection process, while preserving
the throughput and delay advantages of the original
protocol.
3. Extension of DBS-ADAPT with Realistic Param-
eters: We extend our previously proposed Dynamic
Beamwidth Selection-based THz MAC protocol [1]
by incorporating more realistic system-level parame-
ters. Speciﬁcally, we adopt a BER of 10−12, aligning
with ITU technical speciﬁcations, ETSI recommenda-
tions, and IEEE standards for THz data centre require-
ments [26], [27], to ensure ultra-reliable and eﬃcient
communication where data integrity is critical.
4. Adoption of the Latest Standard and Modulation
Schemes: The performance of DBS-ADAPT is fur-
ther evaluated using physical layer parameters based
on the most recent IEEE 802.15.3-2023 THz standard.
This includes the integration of higher-order modula-
tion schemes such as 16-APSK and 32-APSK, allow-
ing for improved data rates and spectral eﬃciency.
5. Scalability Analysis: The scalability analysis is con-
ducted for the proposed protocols by evaluating with
a larger data-center topology of twenty ﬁve nodes.
6. Evaluation with Realistic Traﬃc Models: The pro-
tocol is assessed under a Poisson traﬃc model as well
as a realistic data centre traﬃc pattern characterised by
bursty traﬃc. This ensures a more accurate represen-
tation of actual DC network conditions and validates
protocol performance under practical load variations.
The structure of the paper is as follows: Section 2 re-
views related work on THz MAC protocols. Section 3 in-
troduces the system preliminaries. Section 4 describes the
DBS-ADAPT protocol and its operational details. Section
5 presents the EDBS-ADAPT protocol, including its al-
gorithmic implementation and design. Section 6 outlines
M. Absaruddin et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 2 of 17
Enhanced Dynamic Beamwidth Selection-based THz MAC Protocol for Wireless Data Center Networks
Ref Tx/Rx ini-
tiated
Beamwidth
Manage-
ment
Distance
aware
Technique/Features
Channel Ac-
cess Method
Strength
Limitations
[28] Tx
initiated
Adaptive
No
Beam
switching,
En-
ergy
control,
TDMA
scheduling
TDMA
Energy-eﬃcient, beam
ﬂexibility
Not suitable for bursty DC traﬃc
due to ﬁxed TDMA slots, synchro-
nisation issues
[29] Tx
initiated
Adaptive
Yes
Assisted beamforming;
optimal
beamwidth
calculated from signal
quality and distance
Dual radio
Improved beam align-
ment, throughput
Increased hardware cost, dual-radio
coordination complexity, high
antennas switching delays, large
message overhead led to lower
transmission speed and an increase
in overall latency. Present chip
architecture and the standards
does not support coordination
between the two radios
[30] Tx
initiated
Fixed
beamwidth
Yes
Distance-based
power
allocation
Dual
Radio
and CSMA
Optimises power con-
sumption
[31] Tx
initiated
Adaptive
beamwidth
No
Beam
parameters
ad-
justed
based
on
ex-
changed beamwidth in-
formation
Dual
radio
and CSMA
Enhanced throughput,
dynamic adaptability
[21] Rx
initiated
Fixed
beamwidth
No
Receiver initiated align-
ment,
synchronization
improvements
CSMA
Overcomes
deafness
and
synchronization
issues eﬀectively
Fixed beamwidth: Wider beams
reduce range; narrow beams limit
throughput.
[22] Rx
initiated
Fixed
beamwidth
No
Enhanced node rotation
capability, extended link
discovery
CSMA
Increased
ﬂexibility,
improved client node
alignment
Still limited by ﬁxed beamwidth is-
sues (range-throughput trade-oﬀ)
[24] Rx
initiated
Fixed
beamwidth
No
Limited
data
center
speciﬁc optimizations
CSMA/TDMAQoS support
Insuﬃciently
detailed
MAC
at-
tributes, ﬁxed beamwidth limita-
tions remain
Table 1
THz MAC protocols related Works with techniques, strengths and limitations.
the simulation setup, including parameters, implementation
details, and the performance metrics used for evaluation.
Section 7 discusses the simulation results, comparing DBS-
ADAPT and EDBS-ADAPT with the ADAPT-3 THz MAC
protocol. Finally, Section 8 concludes the paper and presents
the future work.
2. Related Works
In this section, we review related work on THz MAC
protocols, with a particular focus on dynamic beamwidth
selection strategies for data centre networks. Existing THz
MAC protocols are primarily categorised into Tx-initiated
and Rx-initiated approaches [13]. In Tx-initiated protocols,
the transmitter node initiates communication either by di-
rectly sending the data packet in a 0-way handshake or by
ﬁrst sending a control packet (e.g., Request to Send, RTS)
in a 2-way handshake. Conversely, Rx-initiated protocols
involve the receiver node initiating the communication by
broadcasting a control packet indicating its readiness to
receive data. The transmitter then responds by sending the
data packet. This mechanism is particularly relevant in cen-
tralised network architectures typical of data centres, where
the receiver acts as an Access Point (AP) and the transmitters
are client nodes [13].
Several transmitter-initiated THz MAC protocols have
been proposed that employ dual-radio designs or assisted
beamforming to address challenges such as beam alignment
and deafness in directional communication. TAB-MAC [29]
introduces an assisted beamforming MAC protocol that uses
a lower-frequency control plane to aid beam alignment in
the THz band. While it improves beamforming accuracy
and reduces setup delay, it relies on dual-radio hardware,
which is not supported in current chip architectures and adds
complexity [32]. MBPA-MAC [30] proposes a multi-beam,
on-demand power allocation MAC protocol for MIMO-
based THz networks. It enhances spatial reuse and energy ef-
ﬁciency through adaptive power control across beams, but it
inherits similar limitations due to its dependence on dual ra-
dios. DRA-MAC [31] presents a Dual-Radio-Assisted MAC
protocol tailored for distributed THz networks, aiming to
support robust MAC operations via cross-band commu-
nication. However, hardware cost, coordination challenges
between radios, and antenna switching delays remain major
concerns, especially for high-performance data centre envi-
ronments [13]. RS-MAC [33] enhances link reliability using
an intelligent reﬂecting surface (IRS)-based relay selection
mechanism in a dual-channel MAC design, but it incurs
high control overhead and added latency due to reliance on
a separate low-frequency channel, limiting its scalability.
These protocols oﬀer innovative solutions to key MAC-layer
issues but face limitations such as hardware incompatibility,
increased cost, and higher latency, making them less suitable
for ultra-fast, low-latency data centre applications.
Several Rx-initiated THz MAC protocols ([21], [18],
[22], [23], [24]) have been proposed for centralised net-
works, where the receiver (AP) starts communication by
M. Absaruddin et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 3 of 17
Enhanced Dynamic Beamwidth Selection-based THz MAC Protocol for Wireless Data Center Networks
broadcasting a control packet, prompting the client transmit-
ter to send data. In [18], a receiver-initiated MAC and link-
layer synchronisation protocol for THz networks to mitigate
deafness and improve timing coordination is proposed. The
protocol assumes ﬁxed beamwidths and ideal beam align-
ment, lacking adaptability for varying link distances and spa-
tial conditions in data centres. In [21], the ADAPT protocol
is introduced, which is an adaptive directional antenna MAC
protocol that dynamically manages directional scheduling in
THz links. ADAPT does not support dynamic beamwidth
adjustment, which can limit performance in dense environ-
ments where adaptive spatial coverage is critical. In [22],
an extension of the NS-3 simulator with THz link discov-
ery capabilities, enabling simulation of Rx-initiated MAC
behaviour, is presented. Focused on simulation infrastruc-
ture; does not propose or evaluate new MAC strategies or
beam adaptation mechanisms. [23] further enhances ns-3’s
Terasim module to enable TCP communication over THz
links, addressing transport-layer challenges. Concentrates
on transport-layer support without incorporating adaptive
MAC-layer techniques or dynamic beamwidth considera-
tions. In [24], eﬃcient synchronous MAC protocols for
THz wireless data centres are proposed, aiming to reduce
latency and improve throughput using coordinated schedul-
ing. While tailored for data centres, the approach does not
explicitly address dynamic beamwidth control or physical-
layer variations such as real-time BER adaptation.
ADAPT-1 and ADAPT-3 are receiver-initiated THz
MAC protocols designed for short-range applications like
WPAN and WLAN to achieve link-layer synchronisation
[21]. ADAPT-1 uses a 1-way handshake and is an extension
of the LLS-MAC protocol [18], while ADAPT-3 uses a 3-
way handshake and has been enhanced for node discovery
[22] and downlink communication [23]. Both protocols
use ﬁxed beamwidths, where wider beams reduce range
and narrower beams limit throughput. Previous studies [14]
compared these protocols for wireless data centres, and
further analysis [25] highlighted the trade-oﬀs involved
in antenna beamwidth selection. In [28], a PLBS-MAC,
which is a pulse-level beam switching scheme with adap-
tive beamwidth, is presented. However, its contention-free
TDMA approach struggles to handle the bursty traﬃc com-
mon in data centres. The THz MAC protocols proposed for
other applications include TAN-MAC for airborne networks
[34], which is for long-range covering a 500-meter distance,
and CSMA-IIOT for industrial internet of things [35].
Recent studies ([18], [21]) show that receiver-initiated
protocols achieve higher throughput and better synchroni-
sation than transmitter-initiated ones. This is mainly due
to improved coordination, which is crucial when using di-
rectional antennas at both ends to address high path loss
in THz communication. The limitations of these works in-
clude reliance on ﬁxed beamwidths and a lack of dynamic
beam adaptation, which reduces eﬃciency in varying link
conditions typical of data centres. Additionally, some focus
primarily on simulation or transport-layer aspects without
Figure 1: Centralized wireless DC topology with AP and client
nodes as ToR THz nodes.
fully addressing MAC-layer challenges like real-time coor-
dination, control overhead, and bursty traﬃc handling. The
shortcomings found in these MAC protocols are mentioned
in Table 1.
This work proposes a novel THz MAC protocol for data
centres that dynamically selects antenna beamwidth based
on the distance between nodes, enhancing communication
reliability and eﬃciency. It introduces the ﬁrst distance-
aware, dynamic beamwidth selection algorithm within a
receiver-initiated THz MAC protocol, ensuring all nodes are
discovered and communication links are quickly established.
By using a single THz radio, the protocol achieves ultra-high
throughput and reduced delay, making it well-suited for next-
generation data centre environments.
3. System Preliminaries
In this section, the system model with the channel model
is presented.
3.1. System Model
We consider a wireless data centre network composed
of a single access point (AP) and 14 client nodes, each
equipped with a single THz transceiver and a steerable
directional antenna. As illustrated in Figure 1,, the topology
comprises of three rows of racks with ﬁve racks per row,
totaling 15 racks. Each rack is equipped with a single THz
transceiver and a steerable directional antenna (ToR), and
the focus of this simulation is on inter-rack communication.
The horizontal distance between adjacent racks within a row
is 1.2 meters, while each rack measures 0.58 meters in width
and 0.67 meters in depth. In this topology, a THz access
point is centrally located at the ToR of one rack, with the
assumption that no client node resides in the same rack as
the AP. Nodes are deployed in a top-of-rack conﬁguration
and are static. Each node performs a 360-degree sweep to
discover and align with intended communication partners
[36].
M. Absaruddin et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 4 of 17
Enhanced Dynamic Beamwidth Selection-based THz MAC Protocol for Wireless Data Center Networks
3.1.1. Assumptions
To design and evaluate the proposed DBS-ADAPT and
EDBS-ADAPT protocols, we base our model on the follow-
ing realistic and practical assumptions:
• Directional Antenna Deployment: Both the access
point and all client nodes are equipped with steerable
directional antennas mounted at the top-of-rack level.
These antennas are capable of beam rotation and dy-
namic beamwidth adjustment based on node distance.
• Receiver-Initiated Medium Access: The protocol em-
ploys a receiver-initiated three-way handshake using
CTA (Call-to-Access), RTS (Request to Send), and
CTS (Clear to Send) frames. This handshake mech-
anism ensures that only one node is granted transmis-
sion access per time slot, eliminating contention and
avoiding simultaneous transmissions from multiple
clients.
• Exclusive Time Slot Allocation: After the AP sends
a CTS to a selected client, all other client nodes are
restricted from transmitting until the time slot ends.
This guarantees exclusive use of the wireless channel,
thereby preventing beam overlap and co-channel in-
terference.
• Distance-Aware Beamwidth Control: Beamwidth is
dynamically adapted based on the estimated distance
between communicating nodes. This limits unneces-
sary spatial coverage and further minimises the prob-
ability of unintended signal reception.
• Static Node Placement: All nodes are assumed to be
static, which is typical in data centre environments.
This assumption simpliﬁes beam tracking and align-
ment, as node positions do not change over time. It
is assumed that the nodes are already aware of their
perfect coordinates.
• Line-of-Sight (LoS) Availability: The propagation en-
vironment is assumed to provide clear LoS paths be-
tween racks, which is a reasonable assumption given
the structured and obstruction-free layout of modern
data centres.
• Interference Negligibility: The combination of direc-
tional antennas, exclusive time slot access, and dy-
namic beamwidth control ensures that interference is
minimal, and spatial reuse is eﬃciently managed.
• Single-Radio Architecture: Each node, including the
AP, operates with a single THz radio, eliminating
the need for additional hardware and maintaining low
system complexity.
• Synchronised Network Operation: All nodes are time-
synchronised to a global clock, allowing precise coor-
dination of access slots and handshake operations.
Figure 2: Mechanism of DBS-ADAPT in which both AP and
client nodes changes beamwidth during data transmission.
3.2. THz Channel Model
In this work, we adopt the THz channel model presented
in [37], which accounts for two key propagation phenomena:
free-space spreading loss and molecular absorption loss
[[37], [9], [8]].
The received power is calculated as [37]:
𝑃𝑜𝑤𝑒𝑟𝑟(𝑑) = ∫𝐵
𝑃𝐷𝑡(𝑓)|𝐿𝑐(𝑓, 𝑑)|2𝐺𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑡(𝑓)𝐺𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑟(𝑓)𝑑𝑓,
(1)
where 𝐿𝑐(𝑓, 𝑑), the channel frequency response, is de-
termined based on the losses, 𝐺𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑡, 𝐺𝑎𝑖𝑛𝑟represent the
transmitter and receiver antenna gains, respectively, and
𝑃𝐷𝑡denotes the one-sided power spectral density of the
transmitted signal.
4. Dynamic Beamwidth Selection-based THz
MAC Protocol (DBS-ADAPT)
The DBS-ADAPT [1] THz MAC protocol is an en-
hancement of the ADAPT-3 protocol, speciﬁcally designed
for wireless data centre environments. It is a receiver-
initiated MAC protocol that overcomes the limitations of
ﬁxed beamwidth antennas by dynamically adjusting the
antenna beamwidth at both the Access Point and client
nodes during the data transmission phase. Initially, narrow
beams are employed during link discovery to maximise node
detection and alignment accuracy. After successful link es-
tablishment and control packet exchange, the AP calculates
the distance to the client node and instructs both nodes to
adapt their beamwidths dynamically, widening the beam for
data transmission if the distance is within range constraints.
This distance-aware beamwidth adaptation balances com-
munication range and throughput, enabling eﬃcient, high-
speed data transfer without compromising link reliability.1
4.1. Protocol description and ﬂow
In DBS-ADAPT, each client node transmits its positional
coordinates to the AP during the handshake phase. Using
1We presented a preliminary version of DBS-ADAPT in WiMob 2024
[1], this article introduces a fully extended and reﬁned version.
M. Absaruddin et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 5 of 17
Enhanced Dynamic Beamwidth Selection-based THz MAC Protocol for Wireless Data Center Networks
Figure 3: Antenna beamwidth inversely proportional to virtual
antenna sectors and gain.
this information, the AP calculates the distance, and both the
AP and client dynamically adjust their beamwidths based
on that distance. Designed for static wireless data centre
topologies, DBS-ADAPT accommodates clients positioned
at varying distances from the AP, as shown Table 2. The
detailed procedure is outlined in Algorithm 1.
The DBS-ADAPT protocol operates in four distinct
stages, each described below. An overview of the DBS-
ADAPT mechanism is illustrated in Figure 2.
1. Stage 1: Discovery Stage and Initial Link Estab-
lishment Communication begins with the Access
Point initiating the discovery process by broadcast-
ing a Call-to-Access (CTA) packet while sweeping
its directional antenna. To maximise communication
range, the AP initially uses a narrow beamwidth of
6◦, which provides higher antenna gain. At this stage,
client nodes are unaware of the AP’s location. As the
AP sweeps, any client node that receives the CTA
packet aligns its antenna toward the direction of the
AP using the same ﬁxed narrow beamwidth of 6◦
for accurate and long-range detection. This ensures
reliable initial link establishment between the AP and
client nodes.
A wider beamwidth cannot reach distant nodes ef-
fectively due to lower antenna gain, while using an
extremely narrow beamwidth, such as 3◦, signiﬁcantly
increases the time required for a full 360◦sweep.
Therefore, a 6◦beamwidth is chosen as an optimal
balance, narrow enough to maintain suﬃcient gain
for reaching the farthest node in the network, yet
wide enough to complete discovery eﬃciently without
missing any client nodes. This eﬀect is also illustrated
in Figure 3 and Table 2.
2. Stage 2: Exchange of Positional Information and
Distance Calculation Once a client node aligns its
antenna toward the AP and has data to transmit, it
initiates the handshake process by sending a Request
to Send (RTS) packet using a narrow 6◦beamwidth.
The RTS packet includes the client’s positional coor-
dinates. Upon receiving the RTS, the AP extracts the
coordinates and computes the Euclidean distance to
Algorithm 1: Algorithm of DBS-ADAPT [1]
1 Input: Δ𝜃(Beamwidth), 𝑅(𝜙) (Range), Φ - Diﬀerent
beamwidths, 3◦,6◦,9◦,12◦,15◦,18◦,21◦...
2 Output: Δ𝜃dynamic
1: Let Δ𝜃= {Φ1, Φ2, … , Φ𝑛}
2: Δ𝜃narrow ←Narrower beamwidth
3: Δ𝜃wider ←Wider beamwidth
4: (1) CN and AP operations using Δ𝜃narrow
5: Set initial Δ𝜃= min{Φ} for CN and AP during discovery
6: AP sending the broadcast CTA packet
for each sector in AP coverage area do
7:
Broadcast CTA →Δ𝜃narrow
8: end for
9: CN Operation of discovering the AP
for each CN do
10:
if RECEIVE(CTA) then
11:
ALIGNANTENNA(towards AP)
12: end if
13: end for
14: CN sending RTS to AP by including its position
for each RTS sent by CN do
15:
Include position in RTS packet ←(𝑥𝑛, 𝑦𝑛)
16: end for
17: (2) AP operation, it calculates distance based on position
of CN, and mentions in CTS packet
for each RTS received by AP node do
18:
Calculate 𝑑between AP and CN.
19: AP coordinates ←(𝑥𝐴𝑃, 𝑦𝐴𝑃)
20: X ←𝑥𝐴𝑃−𝑥𝑛, Y ←𝑦𝐴𝑃−𝑦𝑛
21: 𝑑(distance) ←
√
X2 + Y2
22: Select Δ𝜃dynamic = max{Φ} while ensuring 𝑑≤𝑅(𝜙)
23: Set AP Δ𝜃= Δ𝜃dynamic
24: end for
for each CTS sent by AP node do
25:
IncludeΔ𝜃dynamic in CTS.
26: end for
27: (3) CN Δ𝜃→Δ𝜃wider as mentioned by AP
for each CTS received by client node do
28:
Extract CTS
29: Set CN Δ𝜃= Δ𝜃dynamic for data transmission
30: end for
the client node using Equation (5), as shown in Line
21 of Algorithm 1.
𝑑=
√
(𝑥AP −𝑥𝑛)2 + (𝑦AP −𝑦𝑛)2
(2)
where 𝑑is the Distance in meters (m), (𝑥𝐴𝑃, 𝑦𝐴𝑃) are
AP coordinates, and (𝑥𝑛, 𝑦𝑛) are Client node coordi-
nates.
This distance is then used to determine the appropriate
beamwidth for eﬃcient data transmission.
3. Stage 3: Dynamic Beamwidth Selection for AP
and Client Nodes Based on the calculated distance,
M. Absaruddin et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 6 of 17
Enhanced Dynamic Beamwidth Selection-based THz MAC Protocol for Wireless Data Center Networks
Client node ID
Node
1
Node
2
Node
3
Node
4
Node
5
Node
6
Node
7
Node
8
Node
9
Node
10
Node
11
Node
12
Node
13
Node
14
Distance to AP
2.2𝑚
1.95𝑚1.86𝑚1.95𝑚2.2𝑚
1.16𝑚0.58𝑚0.58𝑚1.16𝑚2.2𝑚
1.95𝑚1.86𝑚1.95𝑚2.2𝑚
BPSK selected Δ𝜃
24◦
24◦
24◦
24◦
24◦
30◦
48◦
48◦
30◦
24◦
24◦
24◦
24◦
24◦
QPSK selected Δ𝜃
18◦
18◦
18◦
18◦
18◦
24◦
42◦
42◦
24◦
18◦
18◦
18◦
18◦
18◦
8PSK selected Δ𝜃
12◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
18◦
30◦
30◦
18◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
16QAM selected Δ𝜃
12◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
18◦
24◦
24◦
18◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
16APSK selected Δ𝜃
12◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
18◦
24◦
24◦
18◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
32APSK selected Δ𝜃
12◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
18◦
18◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
12◦
Table 2
Details of beamwidth Δ𝜃selected by each of the client nodes concerning their distance and diﬀerent modulation and coding
schemes for DBS-ADAPT and EDBS-ADAPT THz MAC protocol.
the AP selects an optimal beamwidth that guaran-
tees the communication range exceeds the required
distance, as implemented in Line 22 of Algorithm
1. This ensures reliable connectivity while allow-
ing faster antenna rotation, which contributes to im-
proved throughput. The AP then includes the selected
beamwidth in the Clear to Send (CTS) packet sent to
the client node. Upon receiving the CTS, the client
adjusts its antenna beamwidth to match the value
speciﬁed by the AP. As a result, both the AP and
client operate using the same dynamically selected
beamwidth. The speciﬁc beamwidth values corre-
sponding to various distances and Modulation and
Coding Schemes (MCS) are detailed in Table 2.
4. Stage 4: Data Transmission with Adjusted Beamwidth
For data transmission, the client node uses the newly
adjusted beamwidth determined during the handshake
phase. Once the AP successfully receives the data
packet, it responds with an acknowledgement (ACK)
packet. By using dynamically selected beamwidths,
both the AP and client can rotate their antennas more
quickly, leading to faster link alignment, increased
communication opportunities, reduced transmission
delay, and overall improved throughput.
The protocol begins with a narrow beamwidth during
link discovery to ensure all nodes, regardless of distance,
can establish connections while maximising communication
range. Then, during control packet exchange, the AP selects
an optimal beamwidth based on the client’s distance, and the
client adjusts accordingly, repeating this process for every
data transmission to maintain eﬃciency.
DBS-ADAPT improves performance primarily through
dynamic beamwidth adjustment. In this protocol, the access
point determines the appropriate beamwidth based on the
distance to the target client node. The client then adjusts its
beamwidth according to the value received from the AP. This
adjustment occurs for every data packet transmission, lead-
ing to frequent beamwidth switching and increased control
overhead. While DBS-ADAPT achieves better throughput
and delay performance, it does so at the cost of higher
overhead. To mitigate this issue, an improved version called
Enhanced DBS-ADAPT is proposed.
5. Enhanced Dynamic Beamwidth
Selection-based THz MAC Protocol
(EDBS-ADAPT)
We propose an enhancement to DBS-ADAPT called En-
hanced DBS-ADAPT (EDBS-ADAPT), a receiver-initiated
THz MAC protocol speciﬁcally designed for wireless data
centres. EDBS-ADAPT follows the same core mechanism
as DBS-ADAPT, with one key diﬀerence: in DBS-ADAPT,
beamwidth calculation is included in every control packet
exchange, causing it to be repeated for each data packet
transmission. This results in frequent beamwidth switching
and increased overhead. In contrast, EDBS-ADAPT selects
the beamwidth only once at the start of communication,
maintaining it throughout the session. This signiﬁcantly
reduces beamwidth switching overhead. Figure 2, also rep-
resents the EDBS-ADAPT mechanism the only diﬀerence is
that both client and AP nodes selects the beamwidth only
once, and maintains it throughout the session.
5.1. Protocol description and ﬂow
To illustrate the decision-making process of the EDBS-
ADAPT THz MAC protocol, Algorithm 2 outlines the de-
tailed steps. The protocol’s operation is divided into several
stages, as described below.
1. Stage 1: Initial link establishment with narrow
beams
The access point initiates communication
using a ﬁxed beamwidth of 6◦, broadcasting CTA
packets while rotating through all sectors to signal its
readiness to receive data. Since client nodes are ini-
tially unaware of the AP’s location, each client enters
a discovery phase. During this phase, the client uses
the same ﬁxed beamwidth and performs exhaustive
scanning by rotating its antenna across all sectors,
pausing in each one to listen for a CTA packet. When
a client detects a CTA packet in a particular sector, it
stops scanning, aligns its antenna in that direction, and
transitions to the communication phase to begin data
exchange with the AP.
2. Stage 2: RTS transmission and position exchange
The client node generates an RTS packet that includes
its position as coordinates (𝑥𝐴𝑃, 𝑦𝐴𝑃). Upon receiving
M. Absaruddin et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 7 of 17
Enhanced Dynamic Beamwidth Selection-based THz MAC Protocol for Wireless Data Center Networks
Algorithm 2: Algorithm of EDBS-ADAPT
1 Input: Δ𝜃(Beamwidth), 𝑅(𝜙) (Range), Φ - Diﬀerent Δ𝜃
2 Output: Δ𝜃dynamic
1: Let Δ𝜃= {Φ1, Φ2, … , Φ𝑛}
2: Δ𝜃narrow ←Narrower beamwidth, Δ𝜃wider ←Wider beamwidth
3: (1) CN and AP operations using Δ𝜃narrow
4: Set initial Δ𝜃= min{Φ} for CN and AP during discovery
5: AP sending the broadcast CTA packet
for each sector in AP coverage area do
6:
Broadcast CTA →Δ𝜃narrow
7: end for
8: CN Operation of discovering the AP
for each CN do
9:
if RECEIVE(CTA) then
10:
ALIGNANTENNA(towards AP)
11: end if
12: end for
13: CN sending RTS to AP by including its position
for each RTS sent by CN do
14:
Include position in RTS packet ←(𝑥𝑛, 𝑦𝑛)
15: end for
16: (2) Beamwidth Learning and One-Time Switching (at AP)
for each RTS received by the AP node do
17:
Calculate 𝑑between AP and CN.
18: AP coordinates ←(𝑥𝐴𝑃, 𝑦𝐴𝑃)
19: X ←𝑥𝐴𝑃−𝑥𝑛, Y ←𝑦𝐴𝑃−𝑦𝑛𝑑(distance) ←
√
X2 + Y2
20: AP checks if a beamwidth is already stored for this Client:
21: If no beamwidth is stored for this Client:
• AP selects Δ𝜃dynamic = max{Φ} while ensuring
𝑑≤𝑅(𝜙)
• Set AP Δ𝜃= Δ𝜃dynamic
• AP stores Δ𝜃∗
AP,Client ←Δ𝜃∗for this client in a table.
22: end for
23: If beamwidth already stored for this Client:
• AP retrieves Δ𝜃∗
AP,Client from the table.
24: AP includes Δ𝜃∗
AP,Client in the CTS reply to Client.
AP switches beamwidth for this Client only once at ﬁrst
data exchange; subsequent transmissions reuse stored value.
25: (3) Beamwidth Switching at Client (One-Time)
• Upon receiving CTS, reads the Δ𝜃∗
Client (from CTS).
• If the Client has not switched beamwidth before:
– Client switches its antenna to Δ𝜃∗
Client.
– Client marks "beamwidth switched" (ﬂag); future
data exchanges use the same beamwidth.
• If already switched, continue using stored beamwidth.
26: (4) Data Transmission (No Further Switching)
• Data and ACK packets are exchanged using the Δ𝜃=
Δ𝜃dynamic optimal beamwidth.
• No further beamwidth changes are performed for either
the AP or the Client node
the RTS packet, the AP extracts the client’s coordi-
nates and calculates the distance to the client node.
3. Stage 3: AP learning and beamwidth assignment
The AP consults its beamwidth mapping table to de-
termine whether an optimal beamwidth for the client
has already been established:
• If not previously learned: The AP selects an
appropriate beamwidth based on the client’s dis-
tance and link quality, then stores this informa-
tion in the mapping table.
• If already learned: The AP retrieves the previ-
ously stored beamwidth value for the client.
The AP then sends a Clear-To-Send packet to the
client, including the assigned beamwidth value.
4. Stage 4: One-time beamwidth adjustment Upon
receiving the CTS packet, the client extracts the as-
signed dynamic beamwidth and immediately adjusts
its antenna to this value for all future data transmis-
sions to the AP. It also sets a beamwidth adjustment
ﬂag to prevent further changes during the session.
Similarly, before receiving the ﬁrst DATA packet from
the client, the AP switches its antenna to the selected
dynamic beamwidth for that speciﬁc client and sets
a corresponding per-client adjustment ﬂag. The dy-
namic beamwidth values selected based on distance
and various modulation and coding schemes are de-
tailed in Table 2.
6. Simulation details
In this section, we describe our simulation setup, param-
eters, implementation details, and performance metrics. The
simulations are conducted using Terasim, an open-source
THz network simulator built as an extension of NS3 [38].
The speciﬁc simulation parameters are listed in Table 3.
Packet arrivals are modelled using a Poisson process [21],
chosen for its eﬀectiveness in representing random traﬃc
patterns. A log-normal traﬃc model is also used for bursty
traﬃc. All simulation results presented in Section 7 are
reported with a 95% conﬁdence interval.
6.1. Simulation Parameters
The performance evaluation uses various modulation
and coding schemes deﬁned in the recent THz standard IEEE
802.15.3-2023. These include Binary Phase Shift Keying
(BPSK), Quadrature Phase Shift Keying (QPSK), 8-Phase
Shift Keying (8-PSK), 16-Quadrature Amplitude Modula-
tion (16-QAM), 16-Amplitude and Phase Shift Keying (16-
APSK), and 32-Amplitude and Phase Shift Keying (32-
APSK) [39]. For data centre applications, a bit error rate
(BER) of 10−12 is adopted, as recommended by the IEEE
standard, ITU technical parameters, and ETSI guidelines
[27], [26] [13] [40]. Additionally, the performance is eval-
uated by varying interarrival times to analyse how the proto-
col behaves under diﬀerent traﬃc loads, reﬂecting the high
variability typical of data centre traﬃc [41]. The interarrival
time is calculated as described in Equation 6.
M. Absaruddin et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 8 of 17
Enhanced Dynamic Beamwidth Selection-based THz MAC Protocol for Wireless Data Center Networks
Description
Value
Simulator
Terasim - NS3 [38]
Technology
IEEE 802.15.3-2023 [39]
Frequency Range
252.72 321.84 GHz [39]
Central Frequency
287.28 GHz [39]
Channel bandwidth
69.12 GHz [39]
Transmission power
10dBm [27]
Bit error rate (BER)
10−12 [26], [27], [13]
Simulation time for each
run
0.01 seconds
Simulation Runs
20
Noise ﬁgure
7dB
Data Packet Size
65 kB
Retry limit
5
Traﬃc Model
Poisson [21], Log Normal
Modulation
and
Coding
Schemes
BPSK,
QPSK,
8PSK,
16QAM,
16APSK,
and
32APSK [39].
Table 3
Simulation Parameters
𝑃= 𝑇
𝐼
(3)
where 𝑃is number of data packets, 𝑇is the simulation
duration (in seconds), and 𝐼is the inter-arrival time (in
seconds).
Another important parameter in the evaluation is the
antenna turning speed, which depends on the beamwidth
and the time required to cover a sector. The turning speed
refers to how quickly the antenna completes a full 360◦rota-
tion. This speed inﬂuences how fast the antenna can sweep
its coverage area, directly impacting throughput and delay.
The antenna turning speed increases proportionally with the
beamwidth. In other words, antennas with wider beamwidths
rotate faster than those with narrower beamwidths, allowing
nodes to complete rotations more quickly.
The antenna turning speed is calculated using the follow-
ing expression:
𝜔=
1
𝑇circle
(4)
where 𝜔is the Antenna turning speed measured in
rotations per second (degrees/sec), 𝑇circle is the total time
for one complete antenna rotation, measured in seconds. The
total rotation time 𝑇circle can be calculated as:
𝑇circle = 𝑇sector ⋅𝑁sector
(5)
where 𝑇sector is calculated as the sum of control packets
duration, propagation time, SIFS, maximum backoﬀtime,
data transmission time, and 𝑁sector is calculated as
360
beamwidth.
6.2. Implementation Details
For DBS-ADAPT, the Terasim simulator was modiﬁed
to include client node position information in the RTS con-
trol packet header. Speciﬁcally, additional ﬁelds were added
Figure 4: Centralized wireless DC topology with AP and client
nodes as ToR THz nodes.
to the RTS packet to store the client’s 𝑥−𝑦coordinates.
This allows the AP to calculate the distance to the client
node. Similarly, the CTS packet was updated with a new
ﬁeld to carry the beamwidth information, which is sent back
to the client. A new mechanism was implemented at the
MAC layer to enable dynamic beamwidth selection during
data transmission. Additionally, the antenna module was
modiﬁed to update the beamwidth, recalculate antenna gain
whenever the Tx or Rx changes beamwidth, and adjust the
antenna turning speed accordingly.
For EDBS-ADAPT, we modiﬁed the NS3 THz MAC
modules for both AP and client nodes to implement a low-
overhead beamwidth switching mechanism. Unlike previ-
ous approaches that adjusted beamwidth frequently, our
design ensures that both AP and clients switch their an-
tenna beamwidth only once per communication session.
Speciﬁcally, after receiving the CTS packet with the op-
timal beamwidth, the client sets its antenna accordingly
and maintains this setting throughout the session. This one-
time adjustment is enforced in the client’s MAC module,
signiﬁcantly reducing protocol overhead.
On the AP side, the protocol is optimised by maintaining
a mapping between each client’s address and its learned
optimal beamwidth. When an RTS packet is received, the
AP either retrieves the stored beamwidth for that client or
calculates a new one based on the client’s position and
distance. This beamwidth is sent to the client via the CTS
packet. After the ﬁrst data transmission, the AP saves the
beamwidth for future use, avoiding repeated adjustments. A
per-client ﬂag ensures that the AP switches beamwidth only
once per communication session.
6.3. Performance Metrics
The performance of our proposed DBS-ADAPT and
EDBS-ADAPT THz MAC protocols is evaluated using
three key metrics: average throughput, average delay, and
beamwidth switching overhead, as described below.
1. Average throughput: This metric measures the ef-
fectiveness of data delivery. It represents the rate at
M. Absaruddin et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 9 of 17
Enhanced Dynamic Beamwidth Selection-based THz MAC Protocol for Wireless Data Center Networks
Interarrival
Time
(𝜇s)
10
100
200
300
400
500
600
800
1000
No
of
data
pack-
ets
1000
100
50
33
25
20
16
12
10
Table 4
Number of packets sent against each selected inter-arrival
time.
which data packets are successfully transmitted by
each client node. Average throughput is calculated
by averaging the throughput of all individual client
nodes, reﬂecting the overall eﬃciency of data trans-
mission. It is typically measured in bits per second
(bps) [25].
The average throughput is calculated as follows [25]:
𝑇avg = 1
𝑁
𝑁
∑
𝑛=1
𝐿𝑛
𝑡𝑛
(6)
Where 𝑇avg is the average throughput (in bps or Gbps),
𝑁is the total number of client nodes, 𝐿𝑛is the total
size of packets transmitted by node 𝑛(in bits), and 𝑡𝑛
is the total transmission time for node 𝑛(in seconds).
2. Average delay: This metric is measured from the mo-
ment a packet is queued for transmission until it is suc-
cessfully received by the destination node. It accounts
for transmission time, queuing delays, MAC protocol
processing time, and propagation delay. Average delay
is a key indicator of the protocol’s eﬃciency and QoS
in THz communication systems [42].
The average delay is calculated as follows [42]:
𝐷avg = 1
𝑁
𝑁
∑
𝑖=1
(𝑇end,𝑖−𝑇start,𝑖
)
(7)
where 𝐷avg is the average delay measured in millisec-
onds (ms), 𝑇end,𝑖is the time when the transmission of
the 𝑖-th packet is completed.
3. Beamwidth switching overhead: This metric repre-
sents the total number of times a node changes its
beamwidth during communication.
7. Simulation Results
In this section, we present the performance results of
DBS-ADAPT and EDBS-ADAPT compared to the baseline
THz MAC protocol, ADAPT-3 [21], under both Poisson and
bursty traﬃc models.
7.1. Simulation Results with Poisson Traﬃc Model
DBS-ADAPT is evaluated against ADAPT-3 [21] using
modulation and coding schemes (Section 5.3) and a BER
of 10−12, as speciﬁed in the latest IEEE 802.15.3-2023
standard. This comparison demonstrates the eﬀectiveness of
DBS-ADAPT under realistic THz communication param-
eters for data centres. EDBS-ADAPT is further compared
(a) Average throughput with BPSK, QPSK, and 8PSK MCS.
(b) Average delay with BPSK, QPSK, and 8PSK MCS.
Figure 5: EDBS-ADAPT 14 nodes case with varying inter-
arrival time.
against both DBS-ADAPT and ADAPT-3. The proposed
protocols are analysed based on varying interarrival times,
number of nodes, and modulation schemes. In ADAPT-3, a
ﬁxed beamwidth of 6 degrees is used for both the discovery
and data transmission phases. This beamwidth was chosen
based on evaluations within a data centre topology, oﬀering
a balance between range and antenna gain to mitigate high
path loss and ensure stable performance.
7.1.1. EDBS-ADAPT, and DBS-ADAPT with varying
inter-arrival times and modulation schemes
EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT are evaluated under
varying interarrival times and modulation schemes to assess
their performance under diﬀerent traﬃc loads. Interarrival
times, ranging from 10 to 1000 𝜇s, follow an exponential
distribution and represent the time between the arrivals of
two consecutive packets at a node. This variation helps
capture the random and highly variable nature of data centre
traﬃc [41]. For analysis, traﬃc is categorised into high and
low traﬃc scenarios: high traﬃc corresponds to interarrival
times between 1-299 𝜇s, while low traﬃc ranges from 300-
1000 𝜇s. Table 4 presents the number of data packets sent
by each client based on these interarrival times.
M. Absaruddin et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 10 of 17
Enhanced Dynamic Beamwidth Selection-based THz MAC Protocol for Wireless Data Center Networks
In addition to traﬃc variability, performance is eval-
uated across six modulation and coding schemes (MCS):
BPSK, QPSK, 8-PSK, 16-QAM, 16-APSK, and 32-APSK.
These MCSs are essential for enabling eﬃcient and ﬂexible
communication in THz networks. Their varying encoding
capabilities directly inﬂuence key performance metrics such
as average throughput and delay. Higher-order modulation
schemes, such as 16-QAM, 16-APSK, and 32-APSK, are
particularly important for achieving the ultra-high through-
put and low latency required in data centre environments.
Average Throughput and delay with varying inter-
arrival times and modulation schemes: Figures 5(a),
5(b), 6(a), and 6(b) present the average throughput and de-
lay results for EDBS-ADAPT, DBS-ADAPT, and ADAPT-
3 under a ﬁxed 14-node setup with varying interarrival
times. In scenarios using the low modulation scheme BPSK,
EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT consistently outperforms
ADAPT-3 in terms of average throughput. For instance,
under low traﬃc conditions with an interarrival time of 1000
𝜇s, EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT achieves an average
throughput of 32 Gbps, compared to 28 Gbps for ADAPT-
3, an improvement of approximately 15%. When the inter-
arrival time is reduced to 500 𝜇s, throughput for EDBS-
ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT is 26 Gbps versus 23 Gbps for
ADAPT-3, marking a 13% gain.
Even under high traﬃc conditions, where the interar-
rival time is as low as 10 𝜇s, EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-
ADAPT maintains better performance. In this worst-case
scenario, EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT achieves an av-
erage throughput of 0.65 Gbps, compared to 0.63 Gbps
for ADAPT-3, representing a 3% improvement. These re-
sults demonstrates EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT supe-
rior ability to handle varying traﬃc loads, particularly in
maintaining higher throughput under both light and heavy
conditions.
The average delay results for EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-
ADAPT, is shown in Figure 5(b), indicate a consistent re-
duction compared to the ADAPT-3 THz MAC protocol
when using the BPSK modulation scheme. Under low traﬃc
conditions with an interarrival time of 1000 𝜇s, EDBS-
ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT achieves an average delay of 26
ms, compared to 29 ms for ADAPT-3, a reduction of approx-
imately 10%. With an interarrival time of 500 𝜇s, EDBS-
ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT records a delay of 29 ms, while
ADAPT-3 has 32 ms, showing a 10% improvement. Even
under high traﬃc conditions (interarrival time of 10 𝜇s),
EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT reduces average delay by
9% compared to ADAPT-3.
This trend continues across higher modulation schemes,
as illustrated in Figures 6(a) and 6(b). In both high and low
traﬃc scenarios, EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT consis-
tently outperforms ADAPT-3 in terms of average throughput
and delay. These results demonstrate EDBS-ADAPT and
DBS-ADAPT eﬀectiveness in improving communication
eﬃciency, particularly in reducing latency and maintaining
(a) Average throughput with 16QAM, 16APSK, and
32APSK MCS.
(b)
Average
delay
OF
DBS-ADAPT
with
16QAM,
16APSK, and 32APSK MCS.
Figure 6: EDBS-ADAPT 14 nodes case with varying inter-
arrival time.
performance across a range of traﬃc loads and modulation
settings.
EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT consistently outper-
forms ADAPT-3 across all evaluated modulation schemes,
BPSK, QPSK, 8-PSK, 16-QAM, 16-APSK, and 32-APSK,
showing both higher average throughput and lower average
delay. This performance holds across varying traﬃc loads,
from low to high. The consistent improvement demonstrates
that EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT eﬀectively addresses
the unique challenges of diﬀerent modulation levels: provid-
ing robustness for lower-order schemes and maintaining pre-
cision and eﬃciency for higher-order schemes. This adapt-
ability makes EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT well-suited
for diverse communication requirements in THz-based data
centre environments.
Beamwidth switching overhead with varying inter-
arrival times and modulation schemes: Table 5 presents
the beamwidth switching overhead for EDBS-ADAPT, DBS-
ADAPT, and ADAPT-3 under a ﬁxed 14-node setup with
varying interarrival times. ADAPT-3 overhead is 0 for all
the scenarios as it uses the ﬁxed beamwidth. While, EDBS-
ADAPT beamwidth switching overhead is minimised by
M. Absaruddin et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 11 of 17
Enhanced Dynamic Beamwidth Selection-based THz MAC Protocol for Wireless Data Center Networks
(a) Average throughput with BPSK, QPSK and 8PSK MCS
(b) Average delay with BPSK, QPSK and 8PSK MCS
Figure 7: EDBS-ADAPT with varying nodes case and interar-
rival time 500 𝜇s
upto 95% for both the AP and client nodes for all the case
as compared to DBS-ADAPT which have high beamwidth
switching overhead.
7.1.2. EDBS-ADAPT, and DBS-ADAPT with varying
number of nodes and modulation schemes
The performance of the EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT
THz MAC protocols is evaluated by varying the number
of nodes and applying diﬀerent modulation and coding
schemes, as detailed in Table 3. The number of nodes ranges
from 2 to 14, while six MCS conﬁgurations are considered.
For this evaluation, the interarrival time is ﬁxed at 500 𝜇s,
corresponding to a traﬃc load of 20 packets transmitted
by each client node. The resulting average throughput and
average delay for each protocol, across diﬀerent node counts,
are presented in Figures 7 and 8.
Average Throughput and delay with varying nodes
and modulation schemes In the 2-node scenario us-
ing the lowest modulation scheme (BPSK), both EDBS-
ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT achieved an average throughput
of approximately 34 Gbps, while ADAPT-3 reached only
28 Gbps, as illustrated in Fig. 7(a). This represents a 21%
increase in throughput for EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT
(a) Average throughput with 16QAM, 16APSK, and
32APSK MCS.
(b) Average delay with 16QAM, 16APSK, and 32APSK
MCS.
Figure 8: EDBS-ADAPT with varying nodes case and interar-
rival time 500 𝜇s.
compared to ADAPT-3. While the average delay reduced by
6% compared to ADAPT-3 as shown in Fig.7(b). Similarly
for the 10 nodes scenario, Additionally, these protocols
reduced the average delay by about 5% as shown in Fig. 7(b).
Similarly, in the 10-node scenario, EDBS-ADAPT and
DBS-ADAPT demonstrated a 15% improvement in average
throughput and a 7% reduction in average delay compared to
ADAPT-3.
In the 2-node scenario using the highest modulation
scheme (32-APSK), EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT achieved
an average throughput of approximately 148 Gbps, while
ADAPT-3 reached 137 Gbps, as shown in Fig. 8(a). This cor-
responds to a 8% cincrease in throughput for EDBS-ADAPT
and DBS-ADAPT compared to ADAPT-3. Additionally, the
average delay was reduced by about 4% as illustrated in
Fig.8(b).
A similar trend was observed in the 10-node scenario,
where EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT maintained a 5%
higher average throughput and a 4% lower average delay
compared to ADAPT-3.
M. Absaruddin et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 12 of 17
Enhanced Dynamic Beamwidth Selection-based THz MAC Protocol for Wireless Data Center Networks
Table 5
Beamwidth-Switching Overhead 14 nodes case with varying inter-arrival time
Interarrival Time 𝜇s
DBS-ADAPT
client
node overhead
EDBS-ADAPT client
node
overhead
per
node
EDBS-ADAPT
AP
node overhead
EDBS-ADAPT
AP
node
overhead
per
node
10
210
1
210
1
100
90
1
90
1
200
47
1
47
1
300
31
1
31
1
400
24
1
24
1
500
19
1
19
1
600
16
1
16
1
800
12
1
12
1
1000
10
1
10
1
Note:
• DBS-ADAPT: DBS-ADAPT overhead is for both AP and client node and it is the average adjustment per node.
• EDBS-ADAPT: Overhead is for per client node.
• ADAPT-3: AP overhead = 0, Client overhead = 0 (constant for all interarrival times).
Table 6
Beamwidth-Switching Overhead with varying nodes case and interarrival time 500 𝜇s
Name
AP node overhead
Client node overhead
Details
EDBS-ADAPT
1
1 (Per Client Node)
Each client node and the AP node adjust their
beamwidth only once per node.
DBS-ADAPT
19 (Avg adjustment per node)
19 (Avg adjustment per node)
Both the AP and each client node adjusted
their beamwidth multiple times. Here 19 is
the average number of adjustments per node.
ADAPT-3 [21]
0
0
Both AP and client nodes use a ﬁxed
beamwidth.
Beamwidth switching overhead for varying nodes and
modulation schemes: Table 6 compares the beamwidth
switching overhead of EDBS-ADAPT, DBS-ADAPT, and
ADAPT-3 in a ﬁxed 14-node setup with varying interar-
rival times. ADAPT-3 incurs no overhead due to its ﬁxed
beamwidth, while EDBS-ADAPT reduces switching over-
head by up to 94.74% for both AP and client nodes compared
to the higher overhead of DBS-ADAPT.
Figures 7 and 8 show that EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-
ADAPT consistently achieve higher average throughput and
lower average delay than ADAPT-3 across all tested modu-
lation schemes (BPSK to 32-APSK) and node counts from 2
to 14.
7.1.3. Scalability Analysis
The performance of the EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT
THz MAC protocols is evaluated by increasing the number
of nodes to 25 as shown in Fig. 9. In this scenario, there
are 24 client nodes and 1 AP node. In this evaluation,
the interarrival time is ﬁxed at 500 𝜇s. This evaluation is
conducted to determine if the expected throughput gains are
sustained at a larger scale.
The resulting average throughput and average delay for
each protocol are presented in Figures 10(a) and 10(b). In
Figure 9: Topology for 25-node scalability scenario.
this scenario, EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT maintained
a higher average throughput and a lower average delay
compared to ADAPT-3. The results shows the advantages
of the proposed protocol even in the case of scalability when
the number of node increases.
M. Absaruddin et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 13 of 17
Enhanced Dynamic Beamwidth Selection-based THz MAC Protocol for Wireless Data Center Networks
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
(a) Average throughput with 16QAM, 16APSK, and
32APSK MCS.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
10 2
10 3
(b) Average delay with 16QAM, 16APSK, and 32APSK
MCS.
Figure 10: EDBS-ADAPT, DBS-ADAPT and ADAPT-3 per-
formance in the 25-node scalability scenario.
7.1.4. Discussion on Improved Performance
The increased average throughput of EDBS-ADAPT and
DBS-ADAPT is primarily due to its dynamic beamwidth se-
lection during data transmission. By using a wider beamwidth,
the number of sectors decreases, allowing the antenna
to rotate faster and create more frequent communication
opportunities between the AP and client nodes. This faster
sector scanning reduces waiting times and delays, leading
to higher throughput. The key factor driving this improve-
ment is the antennas turning speed, which depends on the
beamwidth and sector timing. Since turning speed is directly
proportional to beamwidth (as shown in Fig. 4), wider
beams enable quicker coverage of the communication area,
positively impacting both throughput and delay.
Higher-order modulation schemes achieve greater aver-
age throughput compared to lower-order schemes, mainly
due to their higher physical layer data rates. For example, 32-
APSK yields the highest throughput, followed by 16-APSK,
16-QAM, 8-PSK, QPSK, and BPSK. This is because higher-
order modulations encode more bits per symbol, allowing
more data to be transmitted within the same time frame.
Conversely, lower-order schemes like BPSK carry fewer
bits, resulting in lower throughput despite their robustness.
ADAPT-3 achieves lower average throughput compared
to DBS-ADAPT and EDBS-ADAPT due to its use of a ﬁxed
beamwidth. Fixed beamwidth prevents nodes from adapting
to varying distances, wider beams are better for nearby nodes
to reduce delay, while narrower beams are ideal for distant
nodes to maintain connectivity. This lack of adaptability
leads to reduced throughput and increased delay, which is
the primary cause of ADAPT-3’s performance decline in the
THz MAC protocol.
Overall, our detailed evaluations under varying inter-
arrival time and varying nodes clearly shows that EDBS-
ADAPT achieves higher throughput and less delay while
EDBS-ADAPT achieves identical throughput and delay
to DBS-ADAPT as it follows the same core mechanism
as DBS-ADAPT. However, the advantage of our EDBS-
ADAPT lies in substantially reduced antenna beamwidth
switching overhead, while preserving the throughput and
delay advantages of the original protocol.
7.2. Simulation Results with Bursty Traﬃc
Data center traﬃc is often bursty, with periods of in-
tense activity followed by idle intervals [43]. This burstiness
impacts the performance of THz MAC protocols, which
depend on precise timing and coordination between nodes.
To simulate such traﬃc, the NS-3 Terasim simulator was
modiﬁed to use a log-normal distribution in the traﬃc gen-
erator, accurately modeling the bursty behavior observed
in data centers. The traﬃc generator class was speciﬁcally
extended to produce packets based on this distribution [44].
In our simulation, the log-normal distribution parame-
ters were set to (𝜇) = 5 and (𝜎) = 1, reﬂecting typical bursty
traﬃc patterns observed in data center studies [43]. These
values were chosen to capture moderate average interarrival
times (𝜇) and high variability (𝜎), eﬀectively modeling the
unpredictable nature of data center traﬃc with bursts of high
packet arrivals followed by idle periods [43]. Additionally,
in the bursty traﬃc scenario we evaluated with 15 nodes
scenario, in which there are 14 client nodes.
Using the lowest modulation scheme (BPSK), EDBS-
ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT consistently outperformed ADAPT-
3 in both throughput and delay. In the 2-node scenario, they
achieved approximately 33 Gbps compared to ADAPT-3’s
27 Gbps, a 22% increase. For 10 nodes, the throughput gain
was around 22% (28 Gbps vs. 23 Gbps). In terms of delay,
EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT reduced average latency
by 9% in the 2-node case and by 10% in the 10-node case, as
shown in Figures 11(a) and 11(b).
At the highest modulation scheme (32-APSK), EDBS-
ADAPT and DBS-ADAPT outperformed ADAPT-3 in both
throughput and delay. In the 2-node scenario, they achieved
approximately 144 Gbps, about 6% higher than ADAPT-3’s
136 Gbps, with an 4% reduction in average delay, as shown in
Figures 12(a) and 12(b). For 10 nodes, throughput improved
by 7%, and delay was reduced by 6% compared to ADAPT-3.
In scenarios with varying numbers of nodes, average
throughput remains stable due to the heavy-tailed nature of
the log-normal distribution, which generates bursts of high
M. Absaruddin et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 14 of 17
Enhanced Dynamic Beamwidth Selection-based THz MAC Protocol for Wireless Data Center Networks
Description
Value
Traﬃc Model
Log normal (bursty) [44]
Simulation time for each
run
0.01 seconds
Simulation Runs
20
Log-Normal (𝜇)
5
Log-Normal (𝜎)
1 [43]
Table 7
Summary of Log-normal bursty-traﬃc Parameters used in the simulation
(a) Average throughput with BPSK, QPSK and 8PSK MCS.
(b) Average delay with BPSK, QPSK and 8PSK MCS.
Figure 11: EDBS-ADAPT, DBS-ADAPT and ADAPT-3 with
varying nodes case and bursty traﬃc.
activity followed by extended silent periods. This allows
nodes to transmit packets quickly and then remain silent for
a while. As the number of nodes increases, the likelihood
of all nodes transmitting simultaneously stays low, reducing
channel contention and maintaining throughput stability.
Figures 11 and 12 show that EDBS-ADAPT and DBS-
ADAPT consistently achieve higher throughput and lower
delay than ADAPT-3 across all modulation schemes (BPSK
to 32-APSK) and node counts from 2 to 14. This perfor-
mance improvement is attributed to their dynamic beamwidth
adjustment, unlike ADAPT-3’s ﬁxed beamwidth approach.
(a) Average throughput with 16QAM, 16APSK, and
32APSK MCS.
(b) Average delay with 16QAM, 16APSK, and 32APSK
MCS.
Figure 12: EDBS-ADAPT, DBS-ADAPT and ADAPT-3 with
varying nodes case and bursty traﬃc.
8. Conclusion
This paper proposes DBS-ADAPT, a dynamic beamwidth
selection-based THz MAC protocol for wireless data cen-
tres, along with its enhanced version, EDBS-ADAPT. Both
protocols overcome the limitations of ﬁxed beamwidth by
dynamically selecting the optimal beamwidth based on node
distance, which improves throughput and reduces delay. By
exchanging node position information, the protocols ensure
that the chosen beamwidth maintains communication range
without compromise, enhancing overall protocol eﬃciency.
M. Absaruddin et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 15 of 17
Enhanced Dynamic Beamwidth Selection-based THz MAC Protocol for Wireless Data Center Networks
The performance of DBS-ADAPT and EDBS-ADAPT was
evaluated through simulations using the Terasim (NS3)
THz simulator with realistic data centre parameters. The
results demonstrate that both protocols achieve higher av-
erage throughput and lower delay compared to the baseline
ADAPT protocol across various traﬃc loads, node counts,
and modulation schemes. Additionally, EDBS-ADAPT re-
duces antenna overhead compared to DBS-ADAPT.
Future work will focus on scaling the evaluation to
larger data centre environments with multiple APs to test
the protocols’ scalability and robustness. Additionally, we
plan to extend our approach by incorporating an adaptive,
distance-aware power allocation strategy to improve energy
eﬃciency.
References
[1] M. Absaruddin, S. Ghafoor, M. H. Rehmani, Dynamic beamwidth
selection-based thz mac protocol for wireless data center networks,
in: 20th International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing,
Networking and Communications (WiMob), 2024, pp. 526–531. doi:
{https://doi.org/10.1109/WiMob61911.2024.10770372}.
[2] K. Geresu, H. Gu, M. Fadhel, W. Wei, X. Yu, Odrad: An optical
wireless dcn dynamic-bandwidth reconﬁguration with awgr and deep
reinforcement learning, Optical Switching and Networking 52 (2024)
100771. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.osn.2024.100771.
[3] J. M. Eckhardt, T. Doeker, T. Kürner, Channel measurements at 300
ghz for low terahertz links in a data center, IEEE Open Journal
of Antennas and Propagation (2024). doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/
OJAP.2024.3391798.
[4] C. Castro, R. Elschner, T. Merkle, F. Rodrigues, J. Machado, A. Teix-
eira, C. Schubert, Thz communications: Paving the way towards
wireless tbps, THz Communications. Springer (2022) 417–421doi:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-73738-2.
[5] C. Terzi, I. Korpeoglu, 60 ghz wireless data center networks: A
survey, Computer Networks 185 (2021) 107730.
doi:https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.comnet.2020.107730.
[6] S. Zhang, R. Kraemer, X. Xue, N. Tessema, H. Freire Santana,
E. Tangdiongga, N. Calabretta, Photonic integrated multicast switch-
based optical wireless data center network, Journal of Optical Com-
munications and Networking 15 (7) (2023) C54–C62.
doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1364/JOCN.484675.
[7] S. Aboagye, M. A. Saeidi, H. Tabassum, Y. Tayyar, E. Hossain, H.-C.
Yang, M.-S. Alouini, Multi-band wireless communication networks:
Fundamentals, challenges, and resource allocation, IEEE Transac-
tions on Communications (2024).
doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/
TCOMM.2024.3366816.
[8] H. Elayan, O. Amin, B. Shihada, R. M. Shubair, M.-S. Alouini, Ter-
ahertz band: The last piece of rf spectrum puzzle for communication
systems, IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society 1 (2019)
1–32. doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/OJCOMS.2019.2953633.
[9] I. F. Akyildiz, C. Han, Z. Hu, S. Nie, J. M. Jornet, Terahertz band
communication: An old problem revisited and research directions for
the next decade, IEEE Transactions on Communications 70 (6) (2022)
4250–4285. doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/TCOMM.2022.3171800.
[10] A. J. Alqaraghuli, J. V. Siles, J. M. Jornet, The road to high data
rates in space: Terahertz versus optical wireless communication, IEEE
Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine 38 (6) (2023) 4–13.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/MAES.2023.3243584.
[11] J. M. Jornet, V. Petrov, H. Wang, Z. Popović, D. Shakya, J. V. Siles,
T. S. Rappaport, The evolution of applications, hardware design,
and channel modeling for terahertz (thz) band communications and
sensing: Ready for 6g?, Proceedings of the IEEE (2024). doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2024.3412828.
[12] S. Ghafoor, M. H. Rehmani, A. Davy, Next Generation Wireless
Terahertz Communication Networks, CRC press, 2021. doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1201/9781003001140.
[13] S. Ghafoor, N. Boujnah, M. H. Rehmani, A. Davy, Mac protocols for
terahertz communication: A comprehensive survey, IEEE Communi-
cations Surveys & Tutorials 22 (4) (2020) 2236–2282.
doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2020.3017393.
[14] M. Absaruddin, S. Ghafoor, M. H. Rehmani, Comparative analysis
of terahertz mac protocols for wireless data center, in: International
Wireless Internet Conference, Springer, 2023, pp. 125–138.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-58053-6_9.
[15] C.-L. Cheng, A. Zajić, Characterization of propagation phenomena
relevant for 300 ghz wireless data center links, IEEE Transactions
on Antennas and Propagation 68 (2) (2019) 1074–1087. doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1109/TAP.2019.2949135.
[16] A.-A. A. Boulogeorgos, J. M. Jornet, A. Alexiou, Directional terahertz
communication systems for 6g: Fact check, IEEE Vehicular Technol-
ogy Magazine 16 (4) (2021) 68–77.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/
MVT.2021.3113883.
[17] V. Petrov, H. Guerboukha, A. Singh, J. M. Jornet, Wavefront hopping
for physical layer security in 6g and beyond near-ﬁeld thz communi-
cations, IEEE Transactions on Communications (2024). doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1109/TCOMM.2024.3484937.
[18] Q. Xia, Z. Hossain, M. Medley, J. M. Jornet, A link-layer syn-
chronization and medium access control protocol for terahertz-band
communication networks, IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing
20 (1) (2019) 2–18. doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/TMC.2019.2940441.
[19] I. F. Akyildiz, J. M. Jornet, Realizing ultra-massive mimo (1024×
1024) communication in the (0.06–10) terahertz band, Nano Com-
munication Networks 8 (2016) 46–54.
[20] I. F. Akyildiz, J. M. Jornet, C. Han, Terahertz band: Next frontier for
wireless communications, Physical Communication 12 (2014) 16–32.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phycom.2014.01.006.
[21] D. Morales, J. M. Jornet, Adapt: An adaptive directional antenna
protocol for medium access control in terahertz communication net-
works, Ad Hoc Networks 119 (2021) 102540. doi:https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.adhoc.2021.102540.
[22] F. Siddiqui, B. Mazumdar, Link discovery extension to ns-3s terahertz
communication module, in: Proceedings of the 2023 Workshop on ns-
3, 2023, pp. 52–59. doi:https://doi.org/10.1145/3592149.3592153.
[23] F. Siddiqui, Enabling tcp communication over terahertz links: An
extension to ns-3’s terasim module, in: Proceedings of the 3rd ACM
Workshop on 5G and Beyond Network Measurements, Modeling, and
Use Cases, 2023, pp. 28–33. doi:https://doi.org/10.1145/3609382.
3610513.
[24] T. Wang, X. Shi, J. Tao, X. Wang, B. Han, Eﬃcient synchronous mac
protocols for terahertz networking in wireless data center, in: IEEE
Conference on Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM
WKSHPS), IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–6.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/
INFOCOMWKSHPS54753.2022.9798122.
[25] M. Absaruddin, S. Ghafoor, M. H. Rehmani, Beamwidth trade-
oﬀs analysis of thz mac protocols for wireless data center, in:
2024 International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing
(IWCMC), IEEE, 2024, pp. 1345–1350.
doi:https://doi.org/10.
1109/IWCMC61514.2024.10592466.
[26] Etsi gr thz 001 v1.1.11 (2024-01), identiﬁcation of use cases
for thz communication systems, https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_
gr/THz/001_099/001/01.01.01_60/gr_THz001v010101p.pdf, accessed on
15.10.2025 (2024).
[27] ITU, Itu-r m.2417-1: Technical and operational characteristics of
land-mobile service applications in the frequency range 275-450 ghz
(2022).
URL
https://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu-r/opb/rep/R-REP-M.
2417-1-2022-PDF-E.pdf
[28] J. Lin, M. A. Weitnauer, Pulse-level beam-switching for terahertz
networks, Wireless Networks 25 (6) (2019) 3047–3062. doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s11276-018-1702-7.
[29] X.-W. Yao, J. M. Jornet, Tab-mac: Assisted beamforming mac pro-
tocol for terahertz communication networks, Nano Communication
Networks 9 (2016) 36–42.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nancom.
M. Absaruddin et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 16 of 17
Enhanced Dynamic Beamwidth Selection-based THz MAC Protocol for Wireless Data Center Networks
2016.07.003.
[30] X.-W. Yao, F.-Z. Ni, C.-C. Wang, Multi-beam on-demand power allo-
cation mac protocol for mimo terahertz communication networks, in:
IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications Workshops
in China (ICCC Workshops), IEEE, 2019, pp. 158–163. doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ICCChinaW.2019.8849973.
[31] X. Zhang, C. Han, X. Wang, Dual-radio-assisted (dra) mac protocols
for distributed terahertz networks, IEEE Open Journal of Vehicular
Technology 2 (2021) 111–124.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/OJVT.
2021.3049969.
[32] C. DAndrea, J. M. Jornet, A. Singh, P. Sen, Z. Ghassemlooy,
S. Zvanovec, S. R. Teli, A. Gholami, C. DAndrea, J. M. Jornet,
et al., 6g wireless technologies, in: The Road towards 6G: Oppor-
tunities, Challenges, and Applications: A Comprehensive View of
the Enabling Technologies, Springer, 2024, pp. 51–114. doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-42567-7_3.
[33] J. Zhai, N. Ma, S. Liu, S. Zheng, A dual channel mac protocol with irs
relay selection mechanism for terahertz communication, in: 2023 9th
International Conference on Computer and Communications (ICCC),
IEEE, 2023, pp. 321–326. doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCC59590.
2023.10507253.
[34] L. He, F. Hu, Z. Chu, J. Zhao, Y. Sagduyu, N. Thawdar, S. Kumar,
Intelligent terahertz medium access control (mac) for highly dynamic
airborne networks, IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic
Systems 59 (3) (2022) 2494–2512.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/
TAES.2022.3215464.
[35] S. Cavallero, C. Buratti, A. Tsarev, G. Cuozzo, E. Khayrov,
Y. Gaidamaka, R. Verdone, Applying carrier sense multiple access to
industrial iot at terahertz frequencies, IEEE Internet of Things Journal
(2023). doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2023.3334514.
[36] A. AlGhadhban, F4tele: Fso for data center network management and
packet telemetry, Computer Networks 186 (2021) 107711. doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2020.107711.
[37] J. M. Jornet, I. F. Akyildiz, Channel modeling and capacity analysis
for electromagnetic wireless nanonetworks in the terahertz band,
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications 10 (10) (2011)
3211–3221. doi:10.1109/TWC.2011.081011.100545.
[38] Z. Hossain, Q. Xia, J. M. Jornet, Terasim: An ns-3 extension to sim-
ulate terahertz-band communication networks, Nano Communication
Networks 17 (2018) 36–44. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nancom.
2018.08.001.
[39] IEEE, Ieee standard for wireless multimedia networks, IEEE Std
802.15.3-2023 (Revision of IEEE Std 802.15.3-2016) (2024) 1–
684doi:10.1109/IEEESTD.2024.10443750.
[40] M. Absaruddin, S. Ghafoor, M. H. Rehmani, Performance evaluation
of THz physical layer parameters based on ieee 802.15.3-2023, in:
Irish Signals and Systems Conference (ISSC), IEEE, 2026, pp. 1–6,
(Accepted for publication).
[41] J. Hu, C. Zeng, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, K. Guo, H. Xu, J. Huang, K. Chen,
Load balancing with multi-level signals for lossless datacenter net-
works, IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking (2024). doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1109/TNET.2024.3366336.
[42] N. Boujnah, S. Ghafoor, et al., Final dll layer model and simulator:
Terahertz based ultra high bandwidth wireless access networks, de-
liverable ID: D5.4, Milestone: Final proposed (October 2020).
URL https://www.terapod-project.eu/
[43] K. Zhao, P. Goyal, M. Alizadeh, T. E. Anderson, Scalable tail latency
estimation for data center networks, in: 20th USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 23), USENIX
Association, Boston, MA, 2023, pp. 685–702.
[44] ns-3
Consortium,
ns-3
lognormalvariable
class
reference,
https://www.nsnam.org/docs/release/3.17/doxygen/classns3_1_1_
log_normal_variable.html, accessed: 2025-05-7 (2013).
M. Absaruddin et al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier
Page 17 of 17
