Contact-based inverse analysis for nonlinear material
identification in spatially heterogeneous solids
Bartłomiej Łazorczyka,b and Roger A. Sauerb,a,c∗
aDepartment of Structural Mechanics, Gdańsk University of Technology, Gdańsk, Poland
bInstitute for Structural Mechanics, Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany
cDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Assam, India
Abstract
This study presents a contact-based isogeometric Finite Element Model Updating (FEMU)
framework for identifying spatially varying constitutive parameters of nonlinear solids. The
formulation considers large quasi-static deformations of hyperelastic 3D solids and thin shells
due to mechanical contact. The proposed inverse approach utilizes full-field displacement mea-
surements available at least on the free surface and, in the case of pure Dirichlet boundary
conditions, the resultant contact forces as well.
The nonuniform material parameter fields
are discretized using low-order Lagrange interpolation independent of the isogeometric analy-
sis mesh, providing control over the inverse problem size and potential discontinuities in the
material. The FEMU least-squares objective is minimized using a trust-region reflective algo-
rithm – a local gradient-based optimization approach. Computational eﬀiciency is enhanced
through the analytical derivatives of the objective and a material continuation strategy. The
proposed framework is evaluated through three numerical examples based on synthetically gen-
erated data: a Canham shell strip on a rigid foundation, indentation of a Koiter shell model
of the human abdominal wall, and indentation of a Neo-Hookean block. The examples ver-
ify the ability of the proposed method to reconstruct inhomogeneous material via mechanical
contact. Analytical derivatives improve the computational eﬀiciency and facilitate conducting
sensitivity and identifiability analyses of the material parameters. The presented approach is
non-destructive and can be used for various inverse problems, such as in-vivo biomechanics of
soft tissues and laboratory material characterization.
Keywords: inverse problems, parameter identification, full-field measurements, heterogeneous
materials, isogeometric analysis, mechanical contact
1
Introduction
Full-field measurement techniques, such as Digital Image Correlation (DIC) (Sutton et al., 2009)
and Digital Volume Correlation (DVC) (Buljac et al., 2018), have become well-established mea-
surement methods in the past few decades, leading to a substantial development in material
testing procedures (Pierron and Grédiac, 2021; Hild and Roux, 2025). These advances have
accelerated the development of several classical inverse approaches for material identification,
including the Finite Element Model Updating (FEMU) method (Kavanagh and Clough, 1971),
Virtual Fields Method (VFM) (Pierron and Grédiac, 2012; Avril, 2026), Constitutive Equa-
tion Gap Method (Latourte et al., 2008; Florentin and Lubineau, 2010), and Equilibrium Gap
Method (Haustrate et al., 2025). Over the years, these classical methods have been system-
atically reviewed and revisited, gradually revealing connections among them (Avril and Pier-
ron, 2007; Avril et al., 2008; Martins et al., 2018; Roux and Hild, 2020; Römer et al., 2025).
∗corresponding author, email: roger.sauer@pg.edu.pl, roger.sauer@rub.de
1
arXiv:2607.18156v1  [cs.CE]  20 Jul 2026
With the rapid progress in machine learning, many novel frameworks for material identifica-
tion have emerged. While some are based on the classical approaches mentioned above, others
introduce fundamentally new directions. Notable contributions include data-driven material
modeling (Leygue et al., 2018), constitutive model discovery (see e.g. EUCLID (Flaschel et al.,
2021)), and Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) (Haghighat et al., 2021).
Material identification is an inverse problem, a class of inherently ill-posed problems for which
the existence, uniqueness, and stability of the solution cannot be guaranteed (Nelles, 2020). The
lack of stability renders inverse problems particularly susceptible to inaccuracies in experimental
data, such as measurement noise. Furthermore, parameters often exhibit poor identifiability
due to the insensitivity of the mathematical model to parameter variations or to compensating
interactions between them (Hartmann and Gilbert, 2018; Zhang et al., 2022). When spatially
heterogeneous material fields are identified, their discretization often yields a high-dimensional
parameter space. For iterative methods such as FEMU, the high dimensionality of the parameter
space not only amplifies issues related to uniqueness and stability but also poses a computational
challenge, requiring eﬀicient optimization algorithms and practically prohibiting the use of finite
differences to evaluate objective function derivatives.
The aforementioned challenges make the identification of spatially varying material fields par-
ticularly diﬀicult. Although most studies focus on homogeneous materials, the reconstruction of
inhomogeneous material fields has recently received increasing attention. Beyond the classical
approaches discussed above, Integrated-DIC (Kirchhoff et al., 2024) treats image registration
and material identification as a single inverse problem.
Bayesian inference (Koutsourelakis,
2009; Thananjayan et al., 2023) also provides a powerful framework for reconstructing spatially
varying material properties; however, its high computational cost requires using specialized
techniques or surrogate models. Recently, PINNs have become a promising tool for identifying
material fields in solids; see, for example, Kamali et al. (2023); Srikitrungruang et al. (2025);
Bouclier et al. (2026); Xu et al. (2026).
FEMU and VFM are the most widely used classical techniques for reconstructing heteroge-
neous material fields in solids. The main concept of FEMU is to minimize the discrepancy
between measurements and the Finite Element (FE) model response. This discrepancy is typi-
cally formulated in a global least-squares sense. FEMU is straightforward to implement and is
a well-established technique known for its robustness and low sensitivity to noise (Chen et al.,
2024). Moreover, FEMU provides a calibrated FE model of the body and can operate on partial
experimental data. However, the iterative nature of FEMU, together with the frequent need for
objective function derivatives, makes it computationally costly. This limitation is often allevi-
ated by deriving analytical derivatives (Avril and Pierron, 2007; Gokhale et al., 2008; Goenezen
et al., 2011). Over the years, FEMU has been employed to identify heterogeneous parameters in
constitutive models including isotropic (Khalil et al., 2006) and anisotropic (Liu et al., 2005) lin-
ear elasticity, isotropic (Goenezen et al., 2012; Simón-Allué et al., 2017) and anisotropic (Kroon
and Holzapfel, 2009) hyperelasticity, elastoplasticity (Andrade-Campos et al., 2020), and dam-
age (Liu et al., 2019). Recently, Łazorczyk and Sauer (2026) proposed an elastodynamic FEMU
framework for identifying unknown stiffness and density fields in Bernoulli–Euler beams. In Ła-
zorczyk and Sauer (2025), this approach was further extended to the simultaneous identification
of elasticity parameters and prestressing force. Mei et al. (2026) introduced a sequential inverse
approach for identification of heterogeneous shear modulus and stress-free configuration in pre-
stressed incompressible Neo-Hookean solids. Touminet et al. (2025) proposed a Bayesian exten-
sion of FEMU based on random fields for representing material inhomogeneity. By combining
the adjoint method with automatic differentiation, the authors’ approach enables an eﬀicient
identification of spatially varying material fields from full-field data.
Selecting a representation of inhomogeneous material fields is a fundamental task for their suc-
2
cessful reconstruction.
Prior knowledge of material heterogeneity, e.g. by visual inspection,
enables partitioning of the solid into regions with approximately homogeneous characteristics.
However, such a priori knowledge is rarely available; thus, the identification problem also in-
volves model selection, characterized by the bias/variance trade-off (Nelles, 2020).
Several
representation strategies have been proposed. In FEMU, a common approach is to define the
unknown material parameters element-wise; however, this rapidly leads to very large inverse
problems. A straightforward remedy is to use a coarser mesh or subdomain-based representation
for the material field, as proposed, e.g., in Kroon and Holzapfel (2008) and Borzeszkowski et al.
(2022). Alternatively, Haustrate et al. (2025) proposed a covariance-weighted Equilibrium Gap
method, treating material inhomogeneity as a random field represented by a Karhunen–Loève
expansion. More recently, Li et al. (2026) introduced a FEMU framework that represents mate-
rial heterogeneity via a neural network, enabling a flexible, self-regularized inverse formulation.
In state-of-the-art material testing, specimen geometry and loading are optimized to generate
heterogeneous strain fields, enabling identification of complex constitutive laws from a single
load experiment (Pierron and Grédiac, 2021; Chen et al., 2024). However, the geometry of
inhomogeneous structures, such as the human abdominal wall or breast, cannot be modified;
thus, boundary conditions, such as loading or physiological movements, remain the primary
design variable. Using multiple load cases has been shown to facilitate material field identifi-
cation (Borzeszkowski et al., 2022; Łazorczyk and Sauer, 2026). In experimental biomechanics,
pressure is regularly applied to induce deformation (Song et al., 2006; Lubowiecka et al., 2022)
and has shown some success in inverse analyses (Simón-Allué et al., 2017; Borzeszkowski et al.,
2022). Nevertheless, as a scalar quantity, it provides limited information. On the other hand,
contact forces are 3D vectors that act at multiple locations and in multiple directions. Contact
loading, for instance, through macro-indentation with a rigid probe, can generate much richer
data. For example, probing at 10 locations and in 10 different directions gives 100 load cases.
Varying the size of the contact probe enables even more combinations.
Mechanical contact is inherent to many medical procedures and therapies.
An example is
ultrasonography, where an ultrasound-emitting probe is brought into close contact with the
skin.
The probe contact can easily induce large deformation of the tissue without causing
damage. Other examples of this kind include mammography, angioplasty, and cell probing. In
all of these examples, the contact information is used to a limited degree. Basic quantities such
as the contact force might be recorded, but the rich 3D deformation field induced by contact
is usually not measured. Medical diagnosis, surgery, and therapy require knowledge about the
properties and state of biological materials under in vivo conditions. Since standard testing of
soft tissues can be inconvenient due to fragility, physiological conditions, and ethical and formal
constraints (Evans, 2017; Navindaran et al., 2023), non-invasive probing becomes particularly
appealing.
Indentation techniques are widely used for assessing material properties. For example, sur-
face measurements obtained from indentation were used to reconstruct heterogeneous material
properties in porcine tissue and the human abdominal wall by Pierrat et al. (2018) and Remus
et al. (2024), respectively. The identifiability of hyperelastic constitutive parameters in homo-
geneous samples subjected to macro-indentation was investigated in Oddes and Solav (2023)
and Ashkenazi et al. (2026). However, these studies assumed local material homogeneity. Stud-
ies on global identification of material fields using contact remain limited. Hartmann and Gilbert
(2018) demonstrated that force measurements and surface deformation from indentation are suf-
ficient to identify material properties of a two-layer Neo-Hookean block. Fougeron et al. (2024)
further investigated the identifiability of hyperelastic parameters in bi-layer soft tissues under
macro-indentation, showing that it strongly depends on the selected constitutive law and that
combining different experimental data types may deteriorate identification quality. Further-
3
more, Lavigne et al. (2023) identified hyperelastic properties and frictionless contact traction
fields from two deformed configurations without knowledge of a stress-free configuration. Re-
cently, Chen et al. (2026a) and Chen et al. (2026b) employed neural operators to reconstruct
spatially varying elastic properties in small-deformation contact. To the best of our knowledge,
these are the only studies that use contact for the identification of heterogeneous material fields.
Every FEMU approach calls a corresponding finite element (FE) solver several times during
the analysis, covering a broad range of design parameters; thus, it requires an eﬀicient and
robust FE formulation. Isogeometric analysis (IGA), pioneered by Hughes et al. (2005), has
become a well-established tool for various computational tasks in solid mechanics. Regarding
mechanical contact, IGA provides arbitrary smoothness across elements boundaries, which im-
proves accuracy and robustness (De Lorenzis et al., 2014). IGA was successfully used in various
inverse problems, including material identification (Dufour et al., 2015; Borzeszkowski et al.,
2022; Łazorczyk and Sauer, 2026) and load reconstruction (Vu-Bac et al., 2018, 2019).
This study demonstrates that simple contact probing can generate data with very high in-
formation content, enabling accurate identification of heterogeneous materials. In particular,
the proposed approach facilitates a detailed characterization of complex material behavior. To
this end, a Contact-based Inverse Analysis (CBIA) approach is proposed for reconstructing
spatially heterogeneous constitutive parameters in nonlinear solids using isogeometric FEMU.
The present work extends the study in Borzeszkowski et al. (2022) by incorporating mechanical
contact and substantially improving the reconstruction performance. The formulation consid-
ers large quasi-static deformations, which are commonly encountered in the modeling of soft
biological tissues. While this study is restricted to isotropic constitutive models, its extension
to anisotropy is straightforward. Spatially varying material properties are represented with a
low-order Lagrange interpolation independent of the finite element (FE) mesh, following the ap-
proach of Borzeszkowski et al. (2022). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time such a
contact-based FEMU framework is proposed for identifying spatially heterogeneous constitutive
models in nonlinear solids and thin shells. In summary, the proposed method is characterized
by the following features:
• A general contact-based FEMU framework for identifying spatially distributed material
properties.
• A FEMU objective function based on displacements and resultant contact forces, with
optional Tikhonov regularization.
• Gradient-based minimization of the objective function using analytical derivatives, a
Newton–Raphson scheme with material incrementation, and a precomputed initial guess.
• Discretization of the unknown material fields with a low-order Lagrange mesh.
• An isogeometric finite element formulation for nonlinear solids and thin shells.
• A rigid, frictionless, and adhesionless mechanical contact formulation.
• A feasibility study of 2D inclusion reconstruction in a heterogeneous solid from surface
data only.
Key to the proposed identification approach are simple, minimally invasive, and nondestructive
contact tests that generate information-rich data, enabling much more accurate inverse analyses
than existing techniques. The proposed approach can be particularly suitable for soft tissues,
such as the abdominal wall and blood vessels.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Sec. 2 introduces the forward problem
considered here, including the finite element formulation and the discretization of the unknown
material fields. Sec. 3 presents the proposed inverse framework, which is followed by a set of
numerical experiments shown in Sec. 4. The paper concludes with Sec. 5.
4
2
Forward problem
This section presents the forward problem that is used in the subsequent inverse analysis. The
employed constitutive laws, contact formulation, and weak forms are introduced, followed by the
finite element discretization and parametrization of the unknown material fields. For brevity,
the general theory of nonlinear solids is omitted, and only the necessary kinematics is introduced
for thin shells. In the following, the 3D quantities are denoted by tilde, e.g. ˜J, while their 2D or
surface-related counterparts are written without any accents. Similarly, quantities associated
with the reference configuration are indicated by uppercase symbols or the subscript “0”, e.g.
S0, while lowercase symbols refer to the deformed configuration.
2.1
Curvilinear surface description for shells
A point on the shell mid-surface1 S is described by the mapping
x = x(ξα) ,
α = 1, 2 ,
(1)
where ξα are curvilinear coordinates associated with a 2D parametric domain P. The surface
parametrization defines the covariant tangent vectors aα := ∂a/∂ξα, the covariant metric com-
ponents aαβ := aα · aβ, the surface unit normal n := (a1 × a2)/Ja, and the area element
da := Ja dξ1dξ2, where Ja := ∥a1 × a2∥. The dual basis vectors are defined as aα := aαβaβ,
satisfying aα · aβ = δα
β, where [aαβ] := [aαβ]−1, and δα
β is the Kronecker delta. Repeated Greek
indices imply summation over {1, 2} throughout the paper.
The curvature tensor b = bαβ aα ⊗aβ is characterized by the Gauss–Weingarten formula
bαβ := n · aα,β = −n,β · aα ,
(2)
where a comma denotes the parametric derivative aα,β = ∂aα/∂ξβ. Its invariants
H := 1
2 bα
α = 1
2 aαβbαβ ,
κ := det [bαβ]
det [aαβ] ,
(3)
represent the mean and Gaussian curvature, respectively. Analogous quantities are defined for
a point X(ξα) in the undeformed shell configuration S0, including Aα, Aα, Aαβ, Aαβ, JA, N,
and B.
The mapping between S0 and S, represented by x = φ(X), is described by the surface defor-
mation gradient
F := aα ⊗Aβ ,
(4)
and the area change da = J dA, where J is the surface stretch given by J = Ja/JA. The
right surface Cauchy–Green tensor is defined by C := F TF = aαβ Aα ⊗Aβ with invariants
I1 = Aαβ aαβ and det C = J2. A more detailed description of thin shell kinematics and its
variation can be found, e.g. in Sauer (2018).
2.2
Constitution
2.2.1
3D solids
For heterogeneous hyperelastic solids, the constitutive law follows from the strain-energy density
function
˜W = ˜W( ˜C, ˜
X) ,
(5)
1Or equivalently on the boundary of a solid body ∂B
5
from which the second Piola–Kirchoff and Cauchy stress tensors are obtained as
˜S = 2∂˜W( ˜C, ˜
X)
∂˜C
and
˜σ = 2 ˜J−1 ˜F ∂˜W( ˜C, ˜
X)
∂˜C
˜F T ,
(6)
respectively, where ˜F denotes the 3D deformation gradient, ˜C is the right Cauchy–Green tensor
in 3D, ˜J = det ˜F . For 3D solids, this work employs an isotropic Neo-Hookean material model
of the form
˜W( ˜
X, ˜I1, ˜J) = ˜µ( ˜
X)
2

˜I1 −3 −2 ln ˜J

+
˜Λ( ˜
X)
2
(ln ˜J)2 ,
(7)
which, after using Eq. (6), yields
˜σ =
˜Λ( ˜
X)
˜J
ln ˜JI + ˜µ( ˜
X)
˜J

˜F ˜F T −I

,
(8)
where I is the standard identity in 3D and ˜I1 is the first invariant of ˜C, i.e., ˜I1 = tr ˜C. The
parameters, ˜Λ( ˜
X) and ˜µ( ˜
X) denote the spatially varying Lamé parameters in 3D elasticity.
Remark 1: For 2D solid models, as considered in Sec. 4.3, the strain-energy density in (7) reduces to
W(X, I1, J) = µ(X)
2
(I1 −2 −2 ln J) + Λ(X)
2
(ln J)2 ,
(9)
which leads to an analogous expression for the Cauchy stress tensor as in Eq. (8).
2.2.2
Shells directly derived in surface form
Shell models can be derived using two different approaches: (1) the projection approach, in
which the shell is treated as a 3D continuum and the stress resultants are usually evaluated
via numerical integration through the thickness; (2) the direct surface approach adopted here,
where the shell is defined with respect to its mid-surface, and the stresses and moments follow
from the surface strain energy density function, see e.g. Roohbakhshan and Sauer (2017). For
shells, the strain energy density can be split into membrane and bending contributions
W(X, aαβ, bαβ) = Wm(X, aαβ) + Wb(X, aαβ, bαβ) ,
(10)
where Wb typically depends only marginally on aαβ. The stress and bending moment compo-
nents are then
τ αβ = 2 ∂W
∂aαβ
,
(11)
Mαβ
0
= ∂W
∂bαβ
.
(12)
Initially planar shells
For initially planar shells, here, Wb is based on the Canham (1970)
model
Wb(X, J, H, κ) = c(X) J (2H2 −κ) ,
(13)
where c(X) denotes the Canham bending stiffness. Substitution of Eq. (13) into Eq. (12) gives
Mαβ
0
= c(X) J bαβ .
(14)
The membrane part, here, Wm follows from the incompressible Neo-Hookean model
Wm(X, ˜I1, ˜J) = T ˜WNH = µ(X)
2
(˜I1 −3) + p(1 −˜J) .
(15)
6
where T is the initial shell thickness, ˜WNH is the 3D Neo-Hookean strain energy density, µ = T ˜µ,
and p is the Lagrange multiplier enforcing the incompressibility constraint ˜g = 1 −˜J, which
equals p = µ/J2 for plain strain (Sauer, 2016). Substituting Eq. (15) into Eq. (11) then yields2
τ αβ = µ(X)

Aαβ −aαβ
J2

.
(16)
The corresponding material tangents can be found in Sauer and Duong (2017).
Initially curved shells
Here, the Koiter shell model (Ciarlet, 2005; Steigmann, 2013) is
considered
W(X, aαβ, bαβ) = 1
8 (aαβ −Aαβ) cαβγδ (aγδ −Aγδ) + T 2
24 (bαβ −Bαβ) cαβγδ (bγδ −Bγδ) ,
(17)
where
cαβγδ = Λ(X) Iαβγδ
dil
+ 2 µ(X) Iαβγδ
dev
,
Iαβγδ
dil
= Aαβ Aγδ
Iαβγδ
dev
= 1
2

AαγAβδ + AαδAβγ
,
(18)
which, upon substitution into Eq. (11) and (12) leads to
τ αβ = 1
2cαβγδ (aαβ −Aαβ) ,
(19)
and
Mαβ
0
= T 2
12 cαβγδ (bαβ −Bαβ) .
(20)
Remark 2: Λ and µ can be obtained by analytical integration of the 3D Saint Venant–Kirchhoff material
model, resulting in
µ = T ˜µ ,
Λ = T 2 ˜Λ˜µ
˜Λ + 2˜µ
,
(21)
which are related to Young’s modulus E and Poisson ratio ν through
˜µ =
E
2(ν + 1) ,
˜Λ = 2 ˜µ ν
1 −2ν .
(22)
2.3
Contact formulation
This work considers frictionless and adhesionless quasi-static contact.
This simplification is
justified because lubricants effectively eliminate dry friction in many medical procedures, such
as ultrasonography. Furthermore, one of the contacting bodies is assumed to be rigid, which
provides a suﬀicient preliminary model for a soft, deformable body (e.g., biological tissue)
interacting with a much stiffer counterpart, such as a medical instrument. Normal contact is
enforced through the impenetrability constraint
gn ≤0 ,
(23)
where
gn := (xs −xp) · np ,
(24)
2The contribution to τ αβ resulting from (13) is negligible for thin shells.
7
denotes the normal gap between a generic point3 xs on the contact surface of the deformable
body ∂Bc1 (or Sc1 ⊂S for shells) and the rigid obstacle surface ∂Bc2. Here, np is the surface
normal of ∂Bc2 at xp, and xp is the closest-point projection of xs ∈∂Bc1 onto ∂Bc2, obtained
from the minimum distance problem
xp(xs) =

y :
min
∀y∈∂Bc2 ∥xs −y∥∀xs ∈∂Bc1

.
(25)
This minimization problem may become significantly challenging for complex contact surface
geometries (Wriggers, 2006). The impenetrability constraint (23) is enforced in the weak form
(see Sec. 2.4) using the penalty method, which defines the normal contact traction as
tc =
−ϵngn nn ,
gn < 0 ,
0 ,
gn ≥0 ,
(26)
where ϵn is the penalty parameter.
2.4
Weak form
For quasi-static problems, the weak form (or principle of virtual work) reads
Gint + Gc −Gext = 0
∀δ˜x ∈V ,
(27)
where δ˜x ∈V is a kinematically admissible variation of ˜x (or δx ∈V for shells). Since only
rigid contact is considered, the weak form of a two-body contact problem is reduced to a single
deformable body. For a 3D solid, the internal virtual work is given by
Gint =
Z
B
˜σ : grad (δ˜x) dv ,
(28)
whereas, for Kirchhoff–Love (KL) thin shells, it takes the form
Gint =
Z
S0
1
2δaαβ τ αβdA +
Z
S0
δbαβ Mαβ
0 dA ,
(29)
where δaαβ and δbαβ denote the variations of aαβ and bαβ, respectively, while ˜σ, τ αβ, and Mαβ
0
follows from the constitutive relations (8), (16), (19), (14), and (20). The contact contribution
associated with the normal traction is written as
Gc = −
Z
∂Bc1
δx · tc da ,
(30)
where tc is defined in Eq. (26). The corresponding linearizations of the weak form, and the
expressions for the external virtual work Gext, can be found in Holzapfel (2000) for solids and
in Sauer and Duong (2017) for shells.
2.5
Finite element discretization
2.5.1
FE approximation
The body B (or shell S) is discretized using the isogeometric analysis (IGA) framework proposed
by Hughes et al. (2005). To recover the standard FEM structure for IGA shape function, the
3Representing a surface quadrature point in the discrete setting.
8
Bézier extraction operator is used (Borden et al., 2011). Consequently, the geometry within an
undeformed element Ωe
0 and deformed element Ωe is approximated as
X ≈Xh =
ne
X
I=1
NIXI = N Xe ,
x ≈xh =
ne
X
I=1
NIxI = N xe ,
(31)
where Xe and xe are the positions of the control points of Ωe
0 and Ωe, respectively. Further,
N(ξ) := [N11, N21, . . . , Nne1] is the matrix of ne NURBS-based shape functions {NI(ξ)}ne
I=1,
and 1 is the d-dimensional identity. The displacement field within the element is approximated
similarly,
u ≈uh =
ne
X
I=1
NI uI = N ue ,
(32)
where ue = xe −Xe. Discretization of the weak form (27) then gives
nel
X
e=1
(Ge
int + Ge
c −Ge
ext) = 0 ∀δx ∈Vh ,
(33)
where nel is the number of finite elements. The elemental contribution to the internal virtual
work is written as
Ge
int = δxT
e f e
int .
(34)
For 3D solids, substituting Eq. (31) into Eq. (28) gives
fe
int =
Z
Ω
BT
e ˜σ dv ,
(35)
where BT
e is the discrete strain-displacement matrix of an element in the current configura-
tion (Wriggers, 2008). For KL shells, the internal force vector can be decomposed into mem-
brane and bending parts
f e
int = f e
intτ + f e
intM .
(36)
Using Eqs. (31) and (29), these parts become
f e
intτ =
Z
Ωe
0
τ αβ NT
,α aβ dA ,
(37)
and
f e
intM =
Z
Ωe
0
Mαβ
0
NT
;αβ n dA ,
(38)
where N;αβ := N,αβ −Γγ
αβN,γ. Here, N,γ and N,αβ denote the first and the second derivatives
of N w.r.t. ξα, while Γγ
αβ := aα,β · aγ are the Christoffel symbols. Discretization of the contact
virtual work in Eq. (30) gives
f e
c = −
Z
∂Be
c1
NTtc da .
(39)
Remark 3: The impenetrability constraint (23) is incorporated into the FE weak form through the
standard active set strategy. The active set A consists of all quadrature points on Bh
c1 for which contact
is detected.
Since changes in A render the contact force vector fc non-differentiable, the objective
function introduced in Sec. 3.1 becomes non-differentiable as well.
Consequently, the weak form (33) reads
δxT (fint + fc −fext) = 0 ∀δx ∈V ,
(40)
9
where fint, fc, and fext are the global FE vectors assembled from their elemental contributions.
The kinematically admissible set Vh contains all nodal variations satisfying the Dirichlet bound-
ary conditions on ∂uBh (or ∂uSh for shells). Thus, for the remaining degrees-of-freedom (dofs),
Eq. (40) implies
f(u) = fint + fc −fext = 0 ,
(41)
which represents the discretized equilibrium equation. Its solution
u =


u1
u2
...
unno

,
(42)
is the global nodal displacement vector of size d nno × 1. The elemental external force vectors
f e
ext, together with the elemental stiffness matrices resulting from the linearization of Ge
int, Ge
c,
and Ge
ext can be found in Wriggers (2006) for solids and in Duong et al. (2017) and Sauer et al.
(2014) for the considered shell models.
2.5.2
Discretization of the material parameters
Each unknown field of material parameters is defined over the body B0 (or shell S0) as a scalar
field q(ξ). Following Borzeszkowski et al. (2022), q(ξ) is approximated within a material element
(ME), ¯Ω¯e, using ¯ne nodal values and corresponding interpolation functions ¯NI as
q = q(ξ) ≈qh =
¯ne
X
I=1
¯NI(ξ)qI = ¯N¯e q¯e ,
(43)
where ¯N¯e := [ ¯N1, ¯N2, . . . , ¯N¯ne] and q¯e := [q1, q2, . . . , q¯ne]T collect the material shape functions
and the nodal values, respectively. The material elements collectively form the material mesh,
an example of which is shown in Fig. 1. Herein, the material mesh consists of 1-node constant
or 4-node bilinear Lagrange elements, which eﬀiciently represent discontinuous and non-smooth
fields.
For higher-order material elements, a B-spline material mesh is recommended, since
higher-order Lagrange interpolation may result in negative inter-nodal values. A comparison of
Lagrange and B-spline material meshes in one dimension can be found in Łazorczyk and Sauer
(2026). For simplicity, all material fields are discretized using a common material mesh, leading
to the global design vector
q =


q1
q2
...
q¯nno

,
(44)
with nvar = ¯d ¯nno components, where ¯nno is the number of material nodes and ¯d is the number
of unknown parameters per material node. Each nodal vector qI contains all parameters values
(e.g., [ΛI, µI]T). An extension to multiple material meshes is straightforward. To incorporate
the material mesh into the FE analysis, a mapping between the material and FE meshes is
required. Both meshes are defined in the parameter domain P(ξα) using conforming rectangular
elements, which satisfy the relation Ω□
e ⊂¯Ω□
¯e . Here, Ω□
e and ¯Ω□
¯e are the element domains in P
for the FE mesh and material mesh, respectively. Further details on the mapping can be found
in Borzeszkowski et al. (2022).
10
Figure 1: An example of a uniform material mesh consisting of four 4-node bilinear material elements
¯Ω¯e for a two-dimensional body B0.
3
Inverse analysis
This section formulates the material identification as a constrained nonlinear least-squares
(NLSQ) problem, followed by an overview of the proposed CBIA framework.
To avoid the
computational cost of finite differences, the identification procedure is accelerated using analyt-
ical derivatives of the objective function. For brevity, these are presented in Appendices A and
B.
3.1
Objective function
Following Borzeszkowski et al. (2022) and Łazorczyk and Sauer (2026), the considered FEMU
inverse problem is formulated as a PDE-constrained minimization of the function
min
q f(u(q), q) ,
(45)
such that the FE equilibrium (41) and box constraints on the design vector components q are
satisfied, i.e.,
f(u(q), q) = 0 ,
0 < qmin ≤qI ≤qmax .
(46)
The objective function f(q) quantifies the discrepancy between the experimental data and their
numerical counterparts, with an optional regularization on q. It depends on the nvar = ¯d ¯nno
nodal values of ¯d constitutive parameters q(ξα), discretized following Eq. (43). Here, f(q) takes
the least-squares form
f(q) =
nlc
X
i=1
"
wU
∥Uexp i −UFE i(q)∥2
∥Uexp i∥2
+ wF
∥Fexp i −FFE i(q)∥2
∥Fexp i∥2
#
+ α2∥L(q −c)∥2 ,
(47)
where nlc is the number of independent load cases and wU, wF are weights associated with the
displacements and the contact force contributions, respectively. For each load case, the vector
Uexp =


uexp
1
uexp
2...
uexp
nexp


(48)
11
contains nexp experimental measurements uexp
I
, I = 1, 2, . . . , nexp, at location xexp
I
∈B (or
xexp
I
∈S for shells) and
UFE(q) =


uh(xexp
1
, q)
uh(xexp
2
, q)
...
uh(xexp
nexp, q)


(49)
is a vector containing the corresponding FE displacements at xexp
I
, which follow from Eq. (32)
as
uh(xexp
I
, q) = N(xexp
I
) ue(q) .
(50)
To assign the same importance to all nlc experiments all terms in the residual part of f(q) are
normalized w.r.t. the Euclidean norm of the corresponding experimental vector. The weights are
selected heuristically in the examples presented in Sec. 4, and their optimization is beyond the
scope of this paper. The last part of Eq. (47) corresponds to generalized Tikhonov regularization,
where α is the regularization parameter, c is an approximation of the solution, and L is a
penalty matrix4. The objective function includes the resultant of contact forces to ensure a
determinable solution when pure Dirichlet boundary conditions are used, i.e., when the lack of
force information allows one to identify q only up to an additive constant. This happens in
Sec. 4.2 and 4.3, where the displacements of a rigid probe are prescribed5. Furthermore, all
parts of Eq. (47) can be concatenated into a single vector, resulting in f(q) reduced to a scalar
product of two vectors, as shown in Appendix A.
3.2
Overview of the inverse framework
To minimize the objective function (47), the proposed inverse framework employs the lsqnon-
lin solver from the MATLAB Optimization ToolboxTM, which uses the Trust-region reflective
(TRR) approach (Coleman and Li, 1996). TRR is a gradient-based optimization method that
iteratively constructs a local approximation of f(q) within a trust-region around the current
iterate qk and computes its minimum (Conn et al., 2000). The algorithm terminates when the
series f(qk) and qk converge, satisfying both
∥qk −qk−1∥≤ϵ ,
(51)
|f(qk) −f(qk−1)| ≤ϵ (1 + |f(qk−1)|) ,
(52)
for a given small tolerance ϵ.
Fig. 2 presents the flowchart of the proposed inverse framework. The inverse analysis starts
with a given IGA mesh, material mesh, and experimental grid. Provided the experimental data
and the constitutive law, the algorithm computes the optimal6 material parameters qopt for a
selected initial guess q0 and hyperparameters wU, wF, and α. Thanks to the material iteration
strategy, described in Sec. 3.3, the FE model iterates on load level λ only at the k = 0 iteration.
For k ≥1, the model updates solely the material increment η, while successively saving the last
equilibrated configuration. The initial guess q0 may come from a preliminary inverse analysis
with a homogeneous material distribution (see Sec. 4.3). Here, this approach is referred to
as homogeneous preconditioning. It provides a reasonable initial guess based on the averaged
response of the FE model; thus, it may filter out a potential non-physical solution to the inverse
4For example a 2D finite difference Laplace operator, or any other approximate differential operator.
5The presence of the contact forces in f(q) may be alleviated by applying a known force to the probe instead
of prescribing its displacements.
6The inverse solution qopt is optimal with respect to the mathematical objective in Eq. (47).
12
Figure 2: Flowchart of the proposed identification algorithm: provided the experimental data, the
constitutive law, and the initial guess q0, the algorithm determines the optimal solution qopt for a
prescribed FE mesh, material mesh, and hyperparameters α, wU, wF
.
problem. Further, this strategy may serve as a basis for a future automatic adaptive material
mesh scheme.
Remark 4: A similar strategy, referred to as element partition, was used in Kroon and Holzapfel
(2008) and succeeding papers. There, the inverse procedure refined the representation of the unknown
material distributions a predefined number of times. For the numerical examples discussed in this work,
precomputing the initial guess is suﬀicient, and no intermediate material mesh is needed.
Analytically derived Jacobian of residuals, J, is transferred from the FE model to the opti-
mization algorithm in an explicit matrix form, or as a function computing the Jacobian-vector
product (see Appendix. A). Along with qopt, the algorithm returns J(qopt), enabling uncertainty
quantification of q (Roux and Hild, 2020).
Since the mechanical contact introduces physical and numerical discontinuities (Duong et al.,
2019), the objective function becomes non-differentiable at any point corresponding to a change
in the active set.
This is illustrated in Sec. 4.1.
However, the risk of landing at a non-
differentiable point is very low in practice. Furthermore, for forward problems where the active
set is not sensitive to the material parameters, such as indentation with a probe, this issue is
marginalized. A potential remedy is to use a smooth contact formulation.
The material mesh regularizes the inverse problem itself. Consequently, no additional regular-
ization is required in most of the examples considered. Nevertheless, for dense material meshes
or high noise levels, additional control over q becomes necessary7. The same holds when only
partial experimental data are available. Furthermore, the initial estimate obtained from homo-
geneous preconditioning may serve as an approximation c of the solution q, in which case the
regularization penalizes deviations from the homogeneous initial guess.
7Additional regularization may also be justified when prior information about the sought material distribution
is available.
13
A risk of landing at a local minimum poses a significant threat to NLSQ problems, as they
often have multiple solutions. To mitigate this, design variables are bounded, and the solution
sensitivity to the initial guess is examined. In addition, the homogeneous preconditioning may
reduce the risk of finding an undesired solution as discussed above. If multimodality of f(q) is
confirmed, one may use a multistart approach. However, the preliminary studies conducted on
the numerical examples in Sec. 4 indicate that they converge to the same solution for different
initial guesses.
3.3
Material iteration strategy
In a standard procedure for solving Eq. (41), the Newton–Raphson (NR) method is applied at
each increment of the load parameter λ. Neglecting higher-order terms, the expansion of (41)
at the ith NR iteration gives
f(ui + ∆u, λ) = f(ui, λ) + K(ui, λ)∆u = 0 ,
(53)
where K denotes the tangent stiffness matrix, see, e.g., Wriggers (2008).
From an alter-
native perspective (Gokhale et al., 2008), the parameter λ may be replaced by η ∈[0, 1],
which interpolates between the converged material state qk and the updated one qk+1, i.e.,
q(η) = qk + η(qk+1 −qk). Analogous to Eq. (53), one obtains
f(ui + ∆u, η) = f(ui, η) + K(ui, η)∆u = 0 ,
(54)
which preserves the same structure. The adopted computational strategy (see Fig. 2) is as
follows: (1) at the initial optimization iteration the NR solver performs load incrementation on
λ and stores the converges state; (2) for the following iterations, the solver loads the previous
state with fixed λ, solves (41) for the material parameter η and stores the converged state.
If necessary, the interval η ∈[0, 1] can be divided into multiple material steps. However, in
most cases η = 1 is suﬀicient, in contrast to the typically more computationally demanding
load incrementation. A limitation of the adopted approach is that it cannot be applied in the
presence of path-dependent forces, such as friction.
Moreover, as the number of load steps
increases in the inverse analysis, the eﬀiciency advantage gradually diminishes. Nevertheless,
for all the considered examples in Sec. 4, the adopted strategy achieves significant reduction in
computational time.
Note that using homogeneous preconditioning as described in Sec. 3.2 does not interrupt the
material iteration strategy. The forward solver only needs to update the material mesh and
recalculate the sensitivities (see Appendix B), while the last converged state at the end of
homogeneous preconditioning can be passed to the target identification run with computed
initial guess q0. Thus, the forward solver still needs to iterate on the load level λ only once.
3.4
Experimental grid and data generation
Since NURBS do not interpolate the control points, a direct comparison between FE nodal
quantities and experimental measurements is not possible. Therefore, the control-point dis-
placements are projected onto the experimental grid according to Eqs. (50) and (79). Examples
of the experimental grids employed in Sec. 4 are shown in Fig. 3.
The quasi-experimental data used in Sec. 4 are generated synthetically using independent FE
models. To avoid an obvious inverse crime (Kaipio and Somersalo, 2005), these models differ
from those employed in the inversion.
In this work, three main discrepancies between the
forward and inverse solvers are introduced, representing sources of a systematic errors:
14
Figure 3: Illustration of experimental grids for the abdominal wall and block probing problems consid-
ered in Secs. 4.2 and 4.3, respectively.
• Finite element discretization error; The synthetic data are generated using a significantly
finer IGA mesh than that used in the inversion. This constitutes the primary source of
systematic error, particularly in contact problems exhibiting strong local deformations.
• Penalty parameter induced error; The penalty method only approximates the exact contact
conditions, allowing small penetrations. A higher value of penalty parameter ϵn is used
for data generation to minimize penetration errors in the data.
• Material element discretization error; The inverse procedure uses low-order Lagrange ap-
proximations for the material fields, while the synthetic data are generated using analytical
material distributions.
In addition to these systematic errors, random noise is added to mimic measurement inaccu-
racies. Since systematic and random errors are of fundamentally different nature, they should
be treated separately. A description of these error sources is provided in Sec. 4, including FE
mesh convergence studies and known material distributions. Other error sources occurring in
practice are not considered here. Among them are:
• Constitutive error; The same constitutive law is assumed in both data generation and
inversion.
• Kinematical simplification error; For shells, synthetic data should originate from 3D con-
tinuum simulations; however, this is often impractical. As shown in Łazorczyk and Sauer
(2026) for 1D structures, the additional error is small as long as the considered kinematical
assumptions are valid.
• Measurement error; Inaccuracies associated with optical measurements are here reduced
to Gaussian noise.
The investigation of these additional error sources is left for future work.
4
Numerical examples
This section presents three numerical examples of increasing complexity, focusing on various
aspects of the proposed CBIA framework. As the fundamental elements of the procedure have
been presented in Borzeszkowski et al. (2022) and Łazorczyk and Sauer (2026), the discussion
here is restricted to contact-related aspects. Firstly, a 1D cantilever shell strip deflecting onto
a rigid foundation is examined in Sec. 4.1. In this simple inverse problem, the contact active
set strongly depends on the material distribution; thus, it allows one to graphically study the
effect of non-differentiability on the f(q) landscape. Secondly, Sec. 4.2 extends the abdominal
wall example from Borzeszkowski et al. (2022) to contact-based synthetic experimental data.
Finally, the reconstruction accuracy using only experimental surface data is investigated for a
block made of rubber-like material in Sec. 4.3. While in the first example, only a single material
15
field is identified, in the other two, two coupled material fields are reconstructed. All FE models
utilize quadratic NURBS elements. For the FE convergence study, the discrete L2-error of the
displacements
eu := ∥uexact −uFE∥
∥uexact∥
(55)
is examined, where uexact is a reference FE solution for a highly refined mesh. In Eq. (55),
both displacement vectors are evaluated on the example-specific experimental grid. In order to
account for measurement inaccuracies, component-wise absolute noise is considered according
to
uexp
Ii
= uexact i(xexp
I
) + unoise i(xexp
I
) ,
unoise i ∈N(0, γ2
Ii) ,
(56)
where i = 1, 2, 3 are the Cartesian components, uexact i is the reference solution, and N(0, γ2
Ii)
is a normal distribution with zero mean and standard derivation γIi, later simply referred to as
noise. Resultant contact forces are always considered noise-free. All cases with random noise
are repeated to obtain statistical estimates. The resulting errors in the following tables are
presented as mean values with standard deviations in the form mean ± std. The results in the
subsequent examples report three indicators of the identification error: (1) the nodal relative
error δI, given by
δI :=

qI,ref −qI,opt
qI,ref
 ,
I = 1, . . . , nvar ,
(57)
where qI,ref are the reference values of the material parameters and qI,opt are the components
of qopt; (2) maximum nodal error δmax := max(δI); and L2-error, defined, e.g., for the Canham
bending stiffness by
δL2 := ∥copt −cref∥L2
∥cref∥L2
,
∥c∥L2 :=
sZ
S0
|c(X)|2 dA ,
(58)
where c(X) follows from Eq. (43). The integration is computed element-wise and then summed.
For the remaining material properties, δL2 follows accordingly.
All examples utilize the material iteration approach, as presented in Sec. 3.2. The size of the
examined inverse problems varies from nvar = 2 material unknowns in Sec. 4.1 to nvar = 6498
in Fig. 14 of Sec. 4.2. For inverse problems with more than 400 unknowns (Fig. 14 and entire
Sec. 4.3), it is more eﬀicient to supply the TRR optimization algorithm with the Jacobian-vector
product (see Appendix A.2) instead of the full Jacobian. The stopping criteria tolerance in (51)
and (52) is ϵ = 10−6. A smaller ϵ usually does not improve the identification. The number of
load levels nll always matches nlc in (47).
4.1
Bending of a shell strip with contact constraint
The first example aims at presenting a low-dimensional inverse problem, which can be easily
visualized, yet provides interesting insights into the identification problem. The example consists
of an undeformed straight shell strip with length Lx = 10L, width Ly = 1L, and surface
density ρ = 10−5 m/L2, see Fig. 4a. The strip is clamped on the left side, while its deflection is
constrained by a rigid, frictionless foundation at Z = −1L. To accurately capture tip contact at
the right end, separate line contact elements are used in addition to the surface contact elements.
Fig. 4b presents the deformation of the strip under a dead load. The boundary conditions are
chosen such that the contact active set strongly depends on the material distribution; thus
allowing one to study the performance of the inverse framework for non-differentiable problems.
16
a.
c.
b.
d.
[L−1]
Figure 4: Bending of a shell strip: a. undeformed configuration with boundary conditions; b. the strip
deformed by a uniform dead load, colored by curvature κ11, ranging from −0.137/L to 0.066/L (to avoid
visible penetration, the strip is shifted by 0.01L upward); c. material mesh with the reference distribution
of the bending stiffness c; d. FE convergence of the discrete L2-error w.r.t. the FE solution for 40960
elements.
The membrane response of the shell follows the incompressible Neo-Hookean model (15) with
constant µ = 1FL. Here, F, L, and m are normalization constants and need not be speci-
fied. The bending response is described by the Canham model (13) with the bending stiffness
distribution
cref(X) =

c0
for
X ∈[0, 5L] ,
0.5c0
for
X ∈(5L, 10L] , ,
(59)
where c0 = 10−3 FL, see Fig. 4c. For the basic material mesh, two constant ME are selected
as Fig. 4c depicts. During the inverse analysis, only c(X) is identified, while µ(X) is assumed
to be known. Since the strip primarily bends, the influence of µ is marginal. Note that the
material mesh matches the reference distribution perfectly, which is an example of an inverse
crime. However, for the sake of this simple example, it is acceptable. The box constraints for
cI are cmin = 0.01c0 and cmax = 10c0. For the cases without noise, the constant initial guess is
5.005c0. Otherwise, it is picked randomly from within the bounds.
A convergence study in Fig. 4d is performed to select a FE mesh for the quasi-experimental
data generation. Following this study, the synthetic experimental data is generated using a
mesh with 160×16 FE. For simplicity, the same ϵn = 10−1 F/L is used for both data generation
and identification. All cases use the same uniform experimental grid with 101 and 11 points in
X and Y - directions, respectively. Note that noise is applied along all directions in 3D.
The first five cases in Tab. 1 study the effect of FE mesh density on the identification results.
In the absence of noise, the forward and inverse solvers differ only in the FE mesh.
The
identification errors decrease monotonically, reaching values around 0.01% in Case 1.5, where
both solvers are identical. These remaining values are likely due to numerical errors. Fig. 5
17
Case
FE
mat.
exp.
load
noise
δmax
δL2
nel
¯nel
nexp/nll
nll
[L]
[%]
[%]
1.1
10 × 1
2 × 1
101 × 11
1
0
19.26
17.23
1.2
20 × 2
2 × 1
101 × 11
1
0
2.29
2.05
1.3
40 × 4
2 × 1
101 × 11
1
0
0.39
0.35
1.4
80 × 8
2 × 1
101 × 11
1
0
0.069
0.063
1.5
160 × 16
2 × 1
101 × 11
1
0
0.012
0.0056
1.6
20 × 2
4 × 1
101 × 11
3
0
2.96
1.88
1.7
20 × 2
10 × 1
101 × 11
3
0
15.56
3.86
1.8
20 × 2
20 × 1
101 × 11
3
0
42.86
6.78
1.9
20 × 2
2 × 1
101 × 11
3
0.01
1.53 ± 0.41
1.23 ± 0.18
1.10
20 × 2
2 × 1
101 × 11
3
0.02
1.89 ± 0.86
1.40 ± 0.40
1.11
20 × 2
2 × 1
101 × 11
3
0.04
2.83 ± 1.77
1.80 ± 0.80
Table 1: Bending of a shell strip: Cases of bending stiffness identification with their FE and material
meshes, experimental grid density, no. of load levels, std. of noise, and identification errors δmax and δL2.
shows the landscape of f(q) for Case 1.2. The non-differentiability of f(q) due to contact is
clearly visible. This can also be seen from the mean curvature graphs in Fig. 6. Each curve
in Fig. 6 represents a fold in the f(q) landscape; hence, a change in the active contact set.
These folds can be divided into two categories: physical and artificial. The latter may occur
due to discretization and contact formulation, while the former are independent of them (Duong
et al., 2019). An example of the former is the onset of the tip contact, corresponding to the
most prominent quarter-round fold in Fig. 5a. Examples of the latter are the smaller folds
corresponding to individual quadrature points entering the active set, shown in Fig. 5b and
Fig. 6b.
Alternative contact strategies, such as the popular mortar method, may partially
alleviate the issue of artificial folds but do not eliminate it. Nevertheless, the objective function
seems to have a unique minimum in the examined range of parameters.
a.
b.
Figure 5: Bending of a shell strip: a. graph of f(q) for Case 1.2 in Tab. 1 over the range [0.001, 30] ×
[0.001, 10]; b. zoom of the same graph over the range [0.4, 2] × [0.001, 1]. The optimal solution qopt and
reference values are highlighted on the right surface.
Cases 1.2 and 1.6–1.8 in Tab. 1 study the refinement of the material mesh in X- direction using
a fixed FE mesh. Using only a single load case with 100% of the load (see Fig. 4b) would
inevitably lead to an indeterminacy of the material unknowns at the right end of the strip.
To avoid this, the subsequent cases in Tab. 1 use three (nll = 3) load cases with 10%, 50%,
18
a.
b.
Figure 6: Bending of a shell strip: mean curvature maps for ranges [0.001, 30] × [0.001, 10] (a.) and
[0.4, 2]×[0.001, 1] (b.), corresponding to the f(q) landscapes from Fig. 5. The mean curvature is computed
based on the finite difference derivatives of the f(q). The red cross in b. indicates the optimal solution.
a.
b.
Figure 7: Bending of a shell strip: a. identified nodal values of the bending stiffness c for Case 1.8 in
Tab. 1; b. average value and std. of the nodal identification error of Case 1.11 in Tab. 1.
a.
b.
Figure 8: Bending of a shell strip: Histograms of the identified bending stiffness c1 (a.) and c2 (b.) for
Cases 1.9–1.11 in Tab. 1. Each histogram is based on 1000 separate identification runs.
19
and 100% of the original load level, where 10% corresponds to contact initialization at the tip.
As expected, the identification errors are consistently increasing with more ME. Refining the
optimal [2 × 1] material mesh increases the flexibility of the spatial material representation,
allowing it to compensate for discrepancies between the forward and inverse solvers. Fig. 7a
shows that the identification error is particularly large at the right strip end. This is expected,
since the material distribution at the tip affects the displacement only locally.
The last three examples in Tab. 1 investigate the effect of noise on the identification results,
with γIi in Eq. (56) varying from 0.01L to 0.04L. The identification errors and their standard
deviations increase consistently with the noise level.
Fig. 7b shows that c2 dominates the
identification error.
As shown in Fig. 5, the deflection of the strip is less sensitive to c2,
which agrees with intuition. The histograms in Fig. 8 and Tab. 1 reveal that increasing noise
significantly affects the statistical dispersion of the identified values, while the mean values are
affected less. The histograms exhibit an approximately normal distribution.
In all cases with 2 × 1 material mesh, the inverse solution is found in 7–8 iterations, while for
denser material meshes it increases up to a maximum of 43 iterations.
4.2
Abdominal wall
a.
c.
b.
d.
Figure 9: Abdominal wall: a. Undeformed configuration with an exemplary position of the contact
probe; b. Top view of the indentation layout.
The rigid probe indents the abdominal wall at nine
positions, enumerated from a to i; c. Deformed geometry of the abdominal wall under uniform pressure
pintra = 1.6 kPa, without any contact. Colors represent the surface stretch J; d. FE convergence of the
discrete L2-error w.r.t. the FE solution for 28224 elements. The nine red dashed lines correspond to the
nine indentation cases.
The second example features the identification of Young’s modulus and thickness distributions
E(X) and T(X) in a shell model of the human abdominal wall, shown in Fig. 9a. The model
20
of Lubowiecka et al. (2018) represents a real abdominal wall geometry, acquired using the mea-
surement methodology of Szymczak et al. (2012), and discretized with a single-patch NURBS
following Borzeszkowski et al. (2021). The shell is pinned along its entire boundary and loaded
through frictionless contact with a rigid probe of radius 2 cm. Additionally, to approximate
physiological conditions, the volume below the abdominal wall is constrained using the La-
grange multiplier method, with the uniform pressure pintra acting beneath the shell chosen as
the Lagrange multiplier. Consequently, the model behaves like a water-filled balloon8. In the
initial contactless configuration, pintra = 0. Details of the volume constraint are given in Sauer
et al. (2014). The active work of muscles is not considered here.
This study extends the numerical example presented in Borzeszkowski et al. (2022), referred
here to as Pressure-based Inverse Analysis (PBIA), where a nearly identical model was subjected
to uniform pressure (see Fig. 9c).
That example was shown to have potential for material
reconstruction. However, the pressurization of the abdominal wall requires invasive medical
treatment, unlike the simple contact probing proposed here, which is noninvasive and does not
require intra-abdominal pressure measurements. The model geometry used in Borzeszkowski
et al. (2022) is modified to avoid high identification errors in corners9. Hence, the PBIA is
repeated here, now featuring absolute noise. The new results are summarized in Tab. 2.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
Figure 10: Abdominal wall: Deformed geometry under the nine contact indentation cases corresponding
to Fig. 9c. For cases b, e, and h, the probe is pushed 5 cm into the abdominal wall, whereas in the
remaining cases it is pushed 4 cm. Colors represent the surface stretch J.
Fig. 9b shows the nine chosen contact probe positions in the abdominal top view. The associated
nine deformed configurations are presented in Fig. 10. For Cases b, e, and h, four load steps
8Neglecting the hydrostatic water pressure.
9The modifications include extending the model corners to obtain approximately right angles there.
21
are generated, corresponding to 2 cm, 3 cm, 4 cm, and 5 cm of indentation. The remaining cases
involve three load steps with 2 cm, 3 cm, and 4 cm of indentation. The synthetic experimental
data is generated using a model with 168×168 FE. A convergence study is conducted in Fig. 9d
to ensure comparable FE error levels for both PBIA and CBIA. Consequently, PBIA and CBIA
employ 28 × 28 and 56 × 56 FE meshes, respectively. Note that the pressure and contact load
cases exhibit similar convergence rates, but the contact load cases show higher initial FE error.
The experimental data generation uses the contact penalty parameter ϵn = 104 F/L, while
for the inverse analysis ϵn = 103 F/L. To mimic optical surface measurements, regions of the
abdominal wall that are in contact with the probe are excluded from the data, as shown, for
example, in Fig. 12d.
The given material distributions, shown in Fig. 11, are defined on the parametric domain ξ and
mapped onto the surface S0. For the constitution, the Koiter shell model (17) is selected. The
shell is assumed to be incompressible; thus, ν = 0.5, and the Poisson ratio is not identified.
For shell formulations directly derived on the mid-surface, ν = 0.5 does not introduce any
numerical diﬀiculties. The reference distribution of Young’s modulus is constant along ξ2 7→Y
and changes along ξ1 7→X according to
Eref(ξ1) =











E1
for
ξ1 ≤1
7 ∨ξ1 ≥6
7 ,
E1 + 1
2(E2 −E1) · (7ξ1 −1)
for
1
7 < ξ1 < 3
7 ,
E2
for
3
7 ≤ξ1 ≤4
7 ,
E2 −1
2(E2 −E1) · (7ξ1 −4)
for
4
7 < ξ1 < 6
7 ,
ξ1 ∈[0, 1],
(60)
while the thickness distribution is constant along ξ1 7→X and varies along ξ2 7→Y as
Tref(ξ2) = T2 −(T2 −T1)(2 ξ2 −1)2 ,
ξ2 ∈[0, 1],
(61)
where E1 = 20 kPa, E2 = 40 kPa, T1 = 1 cm, and T2 = 1.5 cm, see Fig. 11a. The majority
of the following cases use a 7 × 7 material mesh (see Fig. 11b) consisting of bilinear Lagrange
elements, resulting in nvar = 128 discrete unknowns. Note that the material mesh is defined in
ξ domain, meaning that the corresponding physical material elements are non-rectangular.
a.
b.
Figure 11: Abdominal wall: a. reference distributions for Young’s modulus E and thickness T; b. ma-
terial mesh. Adapted from (Borzeszkowski et al., 2022).
The rigid probe, whose displacement is prescribed, induces contact pressure on the abdominal
wall. As discussed in Sec. 3, the use of full Dirichlet boundary conditions requires the force data
to be supplied in an alternative manner. Accordingly, the resultant contact force acting on the
probe enters into the objective function. Its components are chosen to be unaffected by noise.
22
The selected weights in Eq. (47) are wu = 1 and wc = 0.001.
Additional regularization is
omitted. All cases utilize the same 167 × 167 uniform experimental grid. The box constraints
on the material parameters are EI ∈[10 kPa, 50 kPa] and TI ∈[0.5 cm, 2.0 cm], and the constant
initial guess E0 = 30 kPa, T0 = 1.25 cm is used for the cases without noise. Otherwise, it is
picked randomly within the box constraints.
Case
FE
mat.
exp.
load
noise
q(X)
δmax/∆δmax
δL2/∆δL2
nel
¯nel
nexp/nll
nll
[L]
[%]
[%]
2.p1
28 × 28
7 × 7
1672
4
0
E
6.10
1.67
T
6.22
1.54
2.p2
28 × 28
7 × 7
1672
4
0.02
E
+ 5.46 ± 3.14
+ 0.48 ± 0.26
T
+ 3.62 ± 2.29
+ 0.37 ± 0.19
2.p3
28 × 28
7 × 7
1672
4
0.04
E
+ 15.15 ± 6.21
+ 1.57 ± 0.41
T
+ 11.48 ± 4.80
+ 1.24 ± 0.33
2.p4
28 × 28
7 × 7
1672
4
0.08
E
+ 32.91 ± 11.02
+ 4.15 ± 0.83
T
+ 25.85 ± 7.90
+ 3.26 ± 0.56
Table 2: Abdominal wall: Results of identifying E(ξ1, ξ2) and T(ξ1, ξ2) from PBIA, including: FE and
material meshes, experimental grid resolution, no. of load levels, std. of noise, and identification errors.
For Case 2.p1, the total identification errors δmax and δL2 are reported, while the cases with noise show
only the corresponding identification error increases ∆δmax and ∆δL2 w.r.t. Case 2.p1. All cases utilize
the material mesh from Fig. 11b and four load cases corresponding to 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100% of pintra
shown in Fig. 9c. Cases 2.p2–2.p4 are repeated 99 times for statistical analysis.
Tab. 3 presents the identification results of all nine CBIA cases performed separately, denoted
as Cases 2.1a–i, without noise. A comparison of Tabs. 2 and 3 shows that PBIA and CBIA
yield comparable identification L2-errors δL2. This is achieved by selecting a finer FE mesh for
CBIA, as motivated by the FE convergence study in Fig. 9d and discussed above. Nevertheless,
the maximum identification errors, δE
max, obtained with CBIA are up to three times larger than
those with PBIA, whereas for δT
max, both increases and decreases are observed. The last column
of Tab. 3 contains the results for all indentation cases simultaneously supplied to f(q), referred
to as Case 2.1all. This increases the number of load steps available from 4 (or 3) to 30. While
δmax is almost always reduced for both E and T, δL2 is a coarse average of the values for Cases
2.1a–i, particularly for E. For further analysis, Cases 2.1e and 2.1all are studied in more detail.
Nevertheless, similar conclusions can be drawn from analyzing the remaining cases separately.
Case from Fig. 9c
Identification
q(X)
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
all
error [%]
δmax
E
13.10
9.56
19.76
9.51
16.79
10.26
7.54
7.36
17.72
6.63
T
12.82
9.02
7.88
8.50
7.14
5.46
8.39
3.55
6.37
4.70
δL2
E
1.36
1.88
1.87
1.01
2.20
1.23
0.81
0.66
1.29
1.31
T
1.27
1.08
1.15
1.11
0.95
0.92
0.74
0.42
0.83
0.76
Table 3: Abdominal wall: Results of identifying E(ξ1, ξ2) and T(ξ1, ξ2) from CBIA without noise. All
cases utilize 56 × 56 FE mesh, 7 × 7 material mesh, and 167 × 167 experimental grid. For all cases, the
optimal solution is found in 12–15 iterations.
Figs. 12a, c, and e compare the nodal identification errors δI for PBIA (Case 2.p1), single
contact load case (Case 2.1e), and a set of contact load cases (Case 2.1all).
As seen, δmax
23
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
Figure 12: Abdominal wall: A comparison of the identification results for Case 2.p1 (a. and b.), Case
2.1e (c. and d.), and Case 2.1all (e. and f.): a., c., and e.,
show the nodal identification errors for E
and T; b., d., and f., show maps of the objective function residuals. The plotted residuals are root mean
square (RMS) values of ¯UR from all load cases mapped on the experimental grid. The characteristic
holes visible in d. and f. correspond to the contact zones excluded from the experimental data. Note
that the vertical axes have different scales across the bar plots.
24
dominates in the case of CBIA. Fig. 12c shows that the high δmax values reported in Tab. 3
for Case 2.1e are caused by error peaks at the corners and edges of the material mesh. For
Case 2.p1, the distribution of δI is more regular. Corresponding residual maps are presented in
Figs. 12b, d, and f. The residual maps for Case 2.p1 reveal patterns corresponding to FE and
ME meshes, and their values are generally smaller than those of CBIA. For both CBIA cases,
the residuals are higher near the contact areas, illustrating the concentration of FE errors there.
a.
b.
Figure 13: Abdominal wall: Results of CBIA for the probe in position e from Fig. 9b. The convergence
of the nodal identification error δI for Young’s modulus (a.) and thickness (b.) with a uniform FE mesh
refinement. The cases shown here extend Case 2.1e from Tab. 3, but do not appear explicitly there.
Note that the vertical axes have different scales across the bar plots.
a.
b.
Figure 14: Abdominal wall: Results of CBIA for the probe in position e from Fig. 9b. The evolution
of the nodal identification error δI for Young’s modulus (a.) and thickness (b.) with a uniform material
mesh refinement. The cases shown here extend Case 2.1e from Tab. 3, but do not appear explicitly there.
All cases employ 56 × 56 FE mesh. Note that the vertical axes have different scales across the bar plots.
The convergence of the inverse solution for Case 2.1e w.r.t. the FE mesh refinement is shown
25
in Fig. 13. The maximum nodal identification errors tend to occur at the edges of the material
mesh or in the contact area. The results for the last two FE meshes do not differ much. As
the FE mesh approaches the one used for data generation (168 × 168 FE), the last two cases
illustrate the combined effects of material approximation and ϵn. In turn, Fig. 14 shows how
the inverse solution of Case 2.1e evolves with a refinement of the material mesh. As expected,
the identification error increases with the addition of more material nodes, as the model can
better fit the inaccurate experimental data (affected only by the systematic error), resulting in
larger errors at the edges and in contact areas.
The observations above raise a question: what measures can be taken to improve CBIA for noise-
free data? First, CBIA requires a finer FE mesh than PBIA to achieve comparable accuracy.
Since contact induces local deformation, higher FE errors are expected, especially when CBIA
employs a uniform FE mesh.
Therefore, an adaptive, nonuniform FE mesh would improve
CBIA results with minimal computational overhead. Analogously, CBIA is more susceptible to
material approximation errors, as the results for 168 × 168 FE mesh in Fig. 13 show. Thus,
a finer ME mesh is also justified. Note that using the same ϵn for both inversion and data
generation does not improve the results significantly in this case.
Case
FE
mat.
exp.
load
noise
q(X)
∆δmax
∆δL2
nel
¯nel
nexp/nll
nll
[L]
[%]
[%]
2.2all
56 × 56
7 × 7
1672
30
0.02
E
4.62 ± 3.67
0.17 ± 0.20
T
1.28 ± 1.93
0.077 ± 0.074
2.3all
56 × 56
7 × 7
1672
30
0.04
E
11.19 ± 6.78
0.59 ± 0.35
T
4.53 ± 2.65
0.29 ± 0.14
2.4all
56 × 56
7 × 7
1672
30
0.08
E
25.75 ± 12.87
1.57 ± 0.36
T
11.84 ± 4.63
0.79 ± 0.19
Table 4: Abdominal wall: Results of identifying E(ξ1, ξ2) and T(ξ1, ξ2) from all contact load cases
shown in Fig. 9c and simultaneously provided to f(q). The last two columns show the increases in the
identification errors, ∆δmax and ∆δL2, w.r.t. Case 2.1all due to noise in the synthetic experimental data.
For all cases, the optimal solution is found in 13–29 iterations (average 15.7).
a.
b.
Figure 15: Abdominal wall: Distributions of the average increase in the nodal identification error,
∆δave
I
, w.r.t. Case 2.1all, for Young’s modulus (a.) and thickness (b.) in Case 2.4all from Tab. 4. The
corresponding standard deviations of the increases, δstd
I
, show a similar distribution, with pronounced
errors at the edges and corners. Note that the vertical axes have different scales across the bar plots.
To assess the effect of random noise on the identification, Case 2.1all is repeated 99 times for
each of the three noise levels considered for PBIA in Tab. 2. The results are summarized in
26
Tab. 4. Owing to an over sevenfold increase in the amount of experimental data, CBIA exhibits
remarkably smaller increases in δL2. A reduction in ∆δmax is also observed for CBIA; however,
the maximum identification errors remain high. Further, for CBIA, the shell thickness T is
less affected by noise than the Young’s modulus E. A similar, but much weaker, effect can
be observed for the results of PBIA in Tab. 2. Fig. 15 presents the averaged increases in the
nodal identification error w.r.t. Case 2.1all for Case 2.4all. The largest errors tend to occur
at the edges and corners, where the sensitivity of the FE solution to q is particularly low.
Conversely, the smallest errors occur, on average, in the contact areas and the central zone.
Similar observations can be made for Cases 2.1a–i with added noise. These results are not
shown here.
4.3
Block probing
The last example considers a 3D block in plane strain as shown in Fig. 16a. The block has
width Lx = 2L and height Lz = L, and is made of compressible Neo-Hookean solid according
to Eq. (8), with Λ and µ as material parameters. Consequently, the example couples stretching
a.
b.
Figure 16: Block probing: a. The undeformed configuration with boundary conditions and an exemplary
position of the contact probe; b. FE convergence of the discrete L2 error for the load cases shown in
Figs. 18 and 19 w.r.t. the FE solution for 8192 elements. The seven red dashed lines correspond to seven
indentation cases.
and shearing deformations. The reference µ(X, Y ) is given by
µref(X, Y ) =





µ0
for
R ≥R0 ,
µ0 + ∆µ1
2

1 + cos

π R
R0

for
R ≤R0 ,
(62)
where R2 = (X −1.2L)2 + (Z −0.4L)2, and R0 = 0.3L. The reference Λ(X, Y ) follows analo-
gously. Two values of ∆µ1 and ∆Λ1 are considered: ∆µ1 = µ0 and ∆µ1 = −0.8µ0 (respectively
∆Λ1 = Λ0 and ∆Λ1 = −0.8Λ0), which correspond to hard and soft inclusions in the material.
Both are illustrated in Fig. 17 together with the selected material mesh. Quantities L, µ0, and
Λ0 are used for normalization and do not need to be specified.
Displacements of the block are fixed on the bottom (Z = 0), and periodic boundary conditions
are imposed on the sides, so that ui(X = 2L) = ui(X = 0).
The periodic boundary conditions
are used to reduce insensitivity of the FE model to material parameters on the sides for dense
material meshes. A rigid probe of radius 0.25L is pushed into the top of the block at seven
different positions up to an indentation of 0.25L. The displacements are recorded every 0.05L
27
a.
b.
Figure 17: Block probing: Reference distributions of µ in the case of hard (a.) and soft (b.) inclusions
overlayed with a 20 × 10 uniform bilinear material mesh. Distributions of Λ follows analogically.
of indentation, giving five load levels per load case. Figs. 18 and 19 show the deformation maps
for all considered load cases at an indentation depth of 0.25L, for hard and soft inclusions,
respectively.
The synthetic experimental data is generated using a 128 × 64 FE mesh. Based on the separate
convergence study in Fig. 16b, the inverse analysis employs a 40 × 20 FE mesh. The contact
penalty parameter depends on the number of finite elements as ϵn = 12.5F/L × nel.
All
identification cases simultaneously utilize experimental data from the seven probe locations,
giving 7×5 = 35 load levels. Since the considered FE problem is purely Dirichlet, the resultant
contact forces are included in f(q) to ensure a determinable inverse solution. After preliminary
studies, the weights in (47) are selected as wu = 1 and wc = 0.1. The parameter’s box constraints
are [0.01Λ0, 10Λ0] and [0.01µ0, 10µ0]. The use of regularization is described separately for the
two subsequent cases. The homogeneous preconditioning strategy from Sec. 3.2 is always used,
with initial homogenous guess picked randomly between the parameter’s box constraints.
4.3.1
Full-field experimental data
As a first step, the performance of the proposed inverse framework is evaluated with full-field
data.
All cases below utilize the same uniform experimental grid with 201 and 101 points
in X- and Z- directions, respectively. Unlike in Sec. 4.2, the contact zone is included in the
experimental data. No additional regularization is used.
Tab. 5 summarizes four identification cases with noise level ranging from 0 to 0.002L. Each
case presents the identification errors for the hard and soft inclusions. The results indicate that
both inclusion types are reconstructed with comparable accuracy across all cases. Fig. 20 shows
the identified nodal values for Case 3.1 in the absence of noise. Overall, the reconstruction is
highly accurate, except at the contact region located in the upper part of the model (Z = 1L).
As a uniform FE mesh is employed, the FE-based discrepancy between the forward and inverse
solvers is concentrated primarily near the contact surface. Refining the FE mesh of the inverse
solver in the contact zones would eliminate this inaccuracy.
Fig. 21 presents the identification results for two representative samples from Case 3.4. Despite
the high noise level, the hard and soft inclusions in µ(X, Y ) are accurately captured. In contrast,
for Λ(X, Y ), the inverse solution oscillates, and the inclusions become hardly visible, especially
the hard inclusion. Regardless of the case and the noise level, the largest identification errors
occur on the boundary of the material mesh.
28
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
Figure 18: Block probing: Deformed geometry of the block with a hard inclusion for seven load cases
corresponding to the probe positions: a. X = 0.25L, b. X = 0.50L, c. X = 0.75L, d. X = 1.00L,
e. X = 1.25L, f. X = 1.50L, and g. X = 1.75L. Colors represent the local volume change ˜J.
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
Figure 19: Block probing: Deformed geometry of the block with a soft inclusion for seven load cases
corresponding to the probe positions: a. X = 0.25L, b. X = 0.50L, c. X = 0.75L, d. X = 1.00L,
e. X = 1.25L, f. X = 1.50L, and g. X = 1.75L. Colors represent the local volume change ˜J.
29
a.
c.
b.
d.
Figure 20:
Block probing, Case 3.1: distributions of identified nodal values of Λ and µ for hard
(a. and b.) and soft (c. and d.) inclusions. The top surface, where contact occurs, (Z = 1L) corresponds
to I2 = 11.
c.
d.
a.
b.
Figure 21: Block probing: a. and b. exemplary sample from Case 3.4 with hard inclusion: distributions
of identified nodal values of Λ (a.)
and µ (b.).
The top surface, where contact occurs, (Z = 1L)
corresponds to I2 = 11.
30
Case
noise
q(X)
δmax/∆δmax [%]
δL2/∆δL2 [%]
[L]
hard
soft
hard
soft
3.1
0
Λ
66.54
57.31
2.97
3.36
µ
14.02
31.08
1.42
1.81
3.2
0.0005
Λ
+ 8.48 ± 22.89
+ 0.62 ± 11.30
+ 1.12 ± 0.36
+ 0.90 ± 0.24
µ
+ 2.76 ± 5.56
+ 1.50 ± 2.75
+ 0.29 ± 0.33
+ 0.22 ± 0.065
3.3
0.001
Λ
+ 30.66 ± 33.64
+ 13.87 ± 17.75
+ 3.24 ± 0.42
+ 2.93 ± 0.37
µ
+ 11.48 ± 8.38
+ 5.33 ± 6.00
+ 0.86 ± 0.13
+ 0.77 ± 0.16
3.4
0.002
Λ
+ 61.88 ± 44.72
+ 50.43 ± 26.66
+ 7.59 ± 0.74
+ 7.20 ± 0.62
µ
+ 32.92 ± 15.17
+ 18.79 ± 11.63
+ 2.26 ± 0.24
+ 2.15 ± 0.28
Table 5: Block probing: results of identifying Λ(ξ1, ξ2) and µ(ξ1, ξ2) for the hard and soft inclusions.
All cases employ 40 × 20 FE mesh, 20 × 10 material mesh, 201 × 101 experimental grid, and 7 load
cases of 5 load steps. For Case 3.1, the total identification errors δmax and δL2 are reported, while the
subsequent cases with noise show only the corresponding identification error increases ∆δmax and ∆δL2
w.r.t. Case 3.1. All cases with noise are repeated at least 96 times for statistical analysis.
The results indicate that Λ is significantly more sensitive to noise. One possible explanation is
that displacement noise induces local volume fluctuations, to which Λ, as a parameter describing
the compressibility of the material, is particularly sensitive. To address this issue further, Fig. 22
presents the sensitivity measure (Brun et al., 2001), defined for each material node as
δmsqr
I
:=
v
u
u
t
1
3nexp
3nexp
X
i=1
J2
iI ,
(63)
where JiI are the components of the Jacobian (see Appendix A)10. This measure quantifies the
effect of a small perturbation in the material parameter qI on the model response (Zhang et al.,
2022). Hence, parameters with larger values of δmsqr are expected to be the more identifiable.
As shown in Fig. 22, the values of δmsqr associated with Λ are typically three to six times smaller
than those corresponding to µ.
All cases in Tab. 5 exhibit large maximum identification errors, most of which are concentrated
near the model boundaries. As discussed above, the identification errors at the top edge originate
from the FE difference between the forward and inverse solvers. The remaining boundaries are
characterized by remarkably lower values of δmsqr, making the corresponding qI more susceptible
to noise, see Fig. 22.
High δmsqr is not suﬀicient for a parameter to be identifiable, as it does not account for possible
interactions between parameters. For a subset K of the set of nvar material parameters, the
collinearity index is defined as
γK :=
1
√λmin
,
(64)
where λmin is the smallest eigenvalue of ¯JT
K¯JK, and ¯JK is obtained by normalizing the columns
of J (see Appendix A) corresponding to the subset K, i.e., ¯JI = JI/∥JI∥.
The collinearity index quantifies the extent to which the effect of a change of a parameter
qI ∈K on the model response can be compensated by appropriate changes in the remaining
parameters in K.
In particular, such compensation may be up to a level of 1/γK × 100%.
10Since both f(q) and q are normalized, the components of J are dimensionless and δmsqr requires no further
normalization.
31
a.
c.
b.
d.
Figure 22: Block probing: distributions of the sensitivity measures δmsqr evaluated at the optimal
solution qopt for Λ (left) and µ (right) in Case 3.1 with hard (a. and b.) and soft (c. and d.) inclusions.
The top surface, where contact occurs, (Z = 1L) corresponds to I2 = 11.
Therefore, high γK indicates that the parameter subset K is poorly identifiable, even if all
parameters in K have high δmsqr (Brun et al., 2001; Gábor et al., 2017). In general, γK can be
evaluated at different positions in the design space to assess parameter identifiability, especially
for nonlinear problems.
Here, γK is calculated for the whole parameter set for simplicity. At the optimal solution qopt
of Case 3.1, γK = 14.56 and γK = 15.30 for the hard and soft inclusions, respectively. These
values will be used in the following section.
4.3.2
Surface experimental data
In the last example, the experimental data are restricted to the surface at Z = 1L. Preliminary
studies indicated that 7×5 = 35 load steps are not suﬀicient to ensure reliable reconstruction as
before. Therefore, the overall number of load cases is increased substantially. Now, the model
in Fig. 16a is indented in 31 positions, starting from X = 0.25L and ending at X = 1.75L, with
an increment of 0.05L. Moreover, the indentation depth is increased from 0.25L to 0.40L, and
the displacements are recorded every 0.05L of indentation as before. The new setting therefore
yields 31 × 8 = 248 load steps in CBIA. For brevity, the new deformation maps are not shown.
Since the experimental data is limited to the surface, poor identifiability of the material pa-
rameters is expected. For only surface data, the noise-free Case 3.1 in Tab. 5 fails to converge,
leading to γK of the order of 1016. To obtain a stable solution, additional regularization is
introduced. The regularization term in Eq. (47) is selected as
R(α, q) = α2∥q −q0,HP∥2 ,
(65)
where q0,HP is the initial guess from the homogeneous preconditioning strategy. Consequently,
deviations from the homogeneous inverse solution are penalized.
32
a.
b.
Figure 23: Block probing using only surface data: Collinearity index at the optimal solution qopt, as
a function of the regularization parameter α for hard (a.) and soft (b.) inclusions in CBIA based solely
on surface data.
a.
c.
b.
d.
Figure 24: Block probing using only surface data: Distributions of nodal values of Λ(ξ1, ξ2) and µ(ξ1, ξ2)
identified using CBIA based solely on noise-free surface data for hard (a. and b.) and soft (c. and d.)
inclusions. Both CBIA cases are regularized with α values corresponding to Fig. 23. Peak error values
denote the relative identification error of the peak value of the material parameter within the inclusion;
negative values indicate overestimation, and positive values underestimation. The top surface, where
contact occurs, (Z = 1L) corresponds to I2 = 11.
33
The parameter α in Eq. (65) is selected to match the same level of γK as the corresponding
full-field cases from Tab. 5 without noise, see Fig. 23. Here, this criterion is preferred since a
popular L-curve method (Hansen and O’Leary, 1993) promotes overregularized solutions.
Fig. 24 presents the CBIA solutions obtained from noise-free surface data. As expected, the
reconstruction accuracy is much lower than that achieved with full-field data (see Fig. 20),
and all cases exhibit high identification errors.
Although both hard and soft inclusions are
captured in µ(ξ1, ξ2), the inclusions in Λ(ξ1, ξ2) are oversmoothed and deteriorate in shape. For
different values of α, CBIA either oversmooths the inclusions or permits spurious oscillations
to dominate qopt. The soft inclusion is reconstructed more accurately than the hard one for
both Λ and µ, as it has a stronger effect on the model response. For all identified material
fields, Λ and µ are overestimated in the surface layer (I2 = 11). Interestingly, despite the strong
smoothing effect of Tikhonov regularization, CBIA predicts a lower value of µ at the center of
the soft inclusion (0.01µ0) than the reference value (0.2µ0). As shown, despite the substantial
increase in the number of load cases, using surface data alone remains challenging for qualitative
reconstruction with CBIA.
On the other hand, a quantitative assessment of the identified material field may be more
relevant than its absolute values.
It remains to be investigated whether CBIA can reliably
identify the presence of an inclusion using solely surface data. To this end, the reconstructed
material fields are segmented into inclusion and surrounding regions, as shown in Fig. 25.
Subsequently, the similarity between the reference and the identified fields is quantified using
the Dice similarity coeﬀicient
DSC :=
2Area(Sref ∩Sopt)
Area(Sref) + Area(Sopt) ,
(66)
where Sref and Sopt denote the reference and identified inclusions, respectively. DSC takes values
between 0 (no alignment) and 1 (perfect alignment). The regions of inclusions are obtained via
simple thresholding
S• := {x ∈B : |qopt(x) −qref(x)| > t} ,
(67)
where t is the segmentation threshold. Note that in Eq. (67), positive and negative inclusions
are detected equivalently due to the absolute value.
Fig. 25 compares segmentations of the reference material fields with noise-free CBIA results for
both full-field and surface data. As seen, CBIA successfully identifies the inclusion for full-field
data, achieving almost perfect overlap for µ and approximately 90% agreement for Λ. However,
oscillations at the contact surface are still visible, particularly in Λ. The remaining mismatch
between CBIA and the reference is attributed to bilinear interpolation of the material mesh.
For surface data (Figs. 25 g–j), the inclusions are smeared in the Z- direction towards the base
of the block, leading to reduced DSC, especially for Λ. In all surface-data-based cases, artifacts
at the contact surface are observed, likely due to FE discretization errors concentrated there.
Note that the segmentation results are sensitive to the choice of the threshold t in Eq. (67). For
larger t, the soft inclusions yield higher DSC, which follows from Fig. 24.
To investigate the effect of noise on CBIA using solely surface data, the surface displacements
are perturbed with noise. Subsequently, the computations are repeated 10 times for statistical
analysis. The regularization parameter α is kept identical to that determined in Fig. 23. Owing
to regularization, the influence of noise on the results is marginal, yielding DSCΛ = 62.76±0.48%
and DSCµ = 71.08 ± 0.88% for the hard inclusion, and DSCΛ = 48.21 ± 0.45% and DSCµ =
69.84 ± 0.58% for the soft inclusion. Fig. 26 shows the segmentations of the Λ and µ fields
corresponding to the worst-case scenarios in terms of DSC. Compared with Figs. 25g–j, the
inclusions do not differ significantly from those reconstructed with noise-free data. Noticeable
changes are observed only in Fig. 26d.
34
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
X=L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Z=L
Hard inclusion: ground truth
a.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
X=L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Z=L
Soft inclusion: ground truth
b.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
X=L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Z=L
Hard inclusion, full--eld data: $
DSC$ = 0:892
c.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
X=L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Z=L
Soft inclusion, full--eld data: $
DSC$ = 0:876
d.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
X=L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Z=L
Hard inclusion, full--eld data: 7
DSC7 = 0:978
e.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
X=L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Z=L
Soft inclusion, full--eld data: 7
DSC7 = 0:964
f.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
X=L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Z=L
Hard inclusion, surface data: $
DSC$ = 0:617
g.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
X=L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Z=L
Soft inclusion, surface data: $
DSC$ = 0:488
h.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
X=L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Z=L
Hard inclusion, surface data: 7
DSC7 = 0:706
i.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
X=L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Z=L
Soft inclusion, surface data: 7
DSC7 = 0:696
j.
Figure 25: Block probing using only surface data: Segmented images of the identified material fields
for the reference distribution in Fig. 17 (a. and b.) using noise-free full-field data in Fig. 20 (c–f), and
noise-free surface data in Fig. 24 (g–j). The selected threshold in Eq. (67) is t = 0.1.
35
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
X=L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Z=L
Hard inclusion, surface data: $
DSC = 0:620
a.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
X=L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Z=L
Soft inclusion, surface data: $
DSC$ = 0:476
b.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
X=L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Z=L
Hard inclusion, surface data: 7
DSC7 = 0:697
c.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
X=L
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Z=L
Soft inclusion, surface data: 7
DSC7 = 0:684
d.
Figure 26: Block probing using only surface data: Segmented images of the material fields identified
with CBIA based solely on surface data corrupted by noise with γIi = 0.001L. The selected threshold
in Eq. (67) is t = 0.1.
5
Conclusion
This paper proposes a Finite Element Model Updating (FEMU) framework for identifying spa-
tially heterogeneous material properties in nonlinear solids subjected to mechanical contact
under quasi-static conditions. The approach employs isogeometric analysis (IGA) as a robust
discretization method, particularly advantageous for contact computations, and covers both
solids and thin shells. Material fields are reconstructed using experimentally measured resul-
tant contact forces and full-field displacements measured at least on the free surface.
The
theoretical framework is based on a versatile hyperelastic material formulation that can rep-
resent a variety of materials.
Material heterogeneity is described using low-order Lagrange
interpolation independent of the IGA mesh, enabling the representation of non-smooth mate-
rial fields and flexible adjustment of the inverse problem size to avoid under- and overfitting.
The FEMU least-squares objective is minimized using a gradient-based trust-region reflective
algorithm. The computational eﬀiciency of FEMU is improved by using analytical derivatives of
the objective and incrementing material parameters instead of load levels between consecutive
optimization iterations. The inverse analysis is initiated by assuming homogeneous material
properties to obtain a reliable starting point for identifying spatially varying material fields.
Several numerical examples based on synthetically generated experimental data contaminated
with both systematic and random errors investigate various aspects of the proposed framework
and demonstrate the potential of mechanical contact for reconstructing heterogeneous material
properties. The key findings of this study are:
• Due to its ability to generate more data, contact-based inverse analysis (CBIA) outper-
forms its pressure-based counterpart for noisy quasi-experimental data, as demonstrated
by the abdominal wall example in Sec. 4.2. However, CBIA requires a finer FE mesh than
pressure-based analysis due to the localized deformations induced by contact.
• Accordingly, high identification errors are observed in the contact regions for the CBIA
examples in Secs. 4.2 and 4.3. Since these errors originate from the concentration of FE
discretization errors in the contact regions, the use of an adaptive nonuniform IGA mesh
36
is a natural direction for future work.
• The results for the Neo-Hookean block presented in Sec. 4.3 show that parameters related
to material compressibility, such as Λ, are particularly sensitive to noise in the exper-
imental data. This observation appears to be characteristic of indentation tests and is
consistent with the findings of Hartmann and Gilbert (2018).
• Full-field surface displacements and resultant contact forces are suﬀicient to identify the
fields of Neo-Hookean model parameters in the bulk of the solid. However, the resulting
inverse problem is severely ill-conditioned, deteriorating identifiability of material param-
eters and requiring regularization. Although the presence of an inclusion can be detected,
the reconstructed peak values of the material parameters are subject to large errors, as
shown in Sec. 4.3.2.
• Analytical derivatives of the objective and the material iteration strategy provide a sub-
stantial speed-up for FEMU, enabling the solution of inverse problems with nvar = 462
material unknowns in Sec. 4.3 and up to nvar = 6498 material unknowns in Sec. 4.2, see
Fig. 14. However, for nvar = 462, the optimization algorithm becomes the computational
bottleneck, even when Jacobian-vector products (see Appendix A.2) are used.
The presented method applies to a broad range of identification problems involving mechanical
contact and full-field measurements, including in-vivo biomechanics, in-situ structural engi-
neering, and laboratory material testing.
As in-silico simulations for medical diagnosis and
treatment are expected to become increasingly common, there is a growing demand for robust
and eﬀicient inverse methods for identifying inhomogeneous material properties.
The proposed framework can be extended in several ways. Extending the framework to fric-
tional contact is a natural next step. However, as the material iteration strategy is limited to
conservative systems, this is nontrivial. More reliable and eﬀicient contact computations require
adaptive nonuniform IGA discretizations. Nevertheless, the most relevant direction is the devel-
opment of a robust material mesh selection strategy that mitigates both under- and overfitting.
For large inverse problems, more eﬀicient optimization algorithms, such as L-BFGS, may pro-
vide further improvements. Realistic modeling of soft tissues requires extending the formulation
beyond isotropic hyperelasticity to more complex material behaviors, including viscoelasticity
and prestrain. Moreover, since the stress-free geometry is generally unavailable for soft bodies,
future studies should investigate the simultaneous reconstruction of spatially varying material
properties, stress-free geometry, and prestrain-inducing loading.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Prof. Izabela Lubowiecka for her comments and gratefully acknowledge
financial support from the Research School of Ruhr University Bochum through their PhD
Exchange Program and from the Doctoral School at Gdańsk University of Technology.
A
Derivatives of the objective function
This appendix presents two alternative approaches for computing the derivatives of f(q) w.r.t.
the design variable vector q, required by the TRR optimization algorithm. As usual in NLSQ
problems, the derivatives are expressed in terms of the Jacobian of the residual. The stan-
dard approach computes the Jacobian explicitly and is well-suited for relatively small inverse
problems. The approach based on Jacobian-vector products avoids explicit formation of the
Jacobian, and is hence suitable for larger inverse problems. It is important to note that all
37
derivatives shown below are derived assuming a fixed contact active set A, i.e.,
∂(•)
∂q = ∂(•)
∂q

A=const.
.
(68)
A.1
Standard formulation
Given the residuals
¯Ur i := ¯Uexp i −¯UFE i(q) ,
qreg := αL(q −c) ,
(69)
with
¯Uexp i :=
" √wU Uexp i/∥Uexp i∥
√wF Fexp i/∥Fexp i∥
#
,
¯UFE i(q) :=
" √wU UFE i/∥Uexp i∥
√wF FFE i/∥Fexp i∥
#
,
(70)
the objective function in (47) can be written in compact form as
f(q) =
nlc
X
i=1
¯UT
r i ¯Ur i + qT
reg qreg .
(71)
The derivatives of f(q) are decomposed into residual and regularization parts. First, the con-
tribution of a single load case to the residual part is considered. Accordingly, the subscript i is
dropped here for clarity. The gradient of f(q) is given by
g(q) =
∂f(q)
∂q
T
= 2 J(q)T ¯Ur(q) ,
(72)
where
J(q) = ∂¯Ur(q)
∂q
=
JU
JF

,
(73)
is the Jacobian of the residual that consists of blocks
JU = −
√wU
∥Uexp∥
∂UFE
∂q
,
(74)
and
JF = −
√wF
∥Fexp∥
∂FFE
∂q
.
(75)
The Hessian is given by
H(q) = ∂2f(q)
∂q2
= 2 JT J + 2
nexp
X
i=1
[ ¯Ur]i
∂2[ ¯Ur]i
∂q2
≈2 JT J ,
(76)
where the second term is neglected; thus, the Hessian is computed based only on the Jacobian.
This simplification is common among algorithms solving NLSQ problems (see, e.g., Hansen
et al. (2013)).
Remark 5: A common strategy is to scale the design variables to improve the conditioning of the opti-
mization problem, i.e., q := D ¯q with D := diag [q1/q0 , q2/q0 , . . . , qnvar/q0]. Consequently, f becomes
a function of the normalized design vector ¯q, and its derivatives are
∂(•)
∂¯q = ∂(•)
∂q
∂q
∂¯q = ∂(•)
∂q D ,
(77)
38
e.q., J(¯q) = J(q) D.
To compute (74), one needs to expand
∂UFE
∂q
= ∂UFE
∂u
∂u
∂q ,
(78)
where u is given in Eq. (42), and ∂UFE/∂u can be found in Borzeszkowski et al. (2022).
Remark 6: It is worth noting that due to the linear structure of Eq. (50), the matrix ∂UFE/∂u can
be used to conveniently project kinematic quantities from the FE mesh onto the experimental grid, for
example
UFE = ∂UFE
∂u
u ,
xexp = ∂UFE
∂u
x .
(79)
The derivative ∂u/∂q follows from differentiating the equilibrium equation (41)
df(u(q), q)
dq
= d
dq (fint(u(q), q) + fc(u(q)) −fexp(u(q))) = 0 ,
(80)
which leads to a set of linear systems
K∂u
∂q = −∂fint
∂q = −S ,
(81)
where K is the tangent stiffness matrix, given by
K = ∂fint
∂u + ∂fc
∂u −∂fext
∂u ,
(82)
and S = ∂fint/∂q is the global sensitivity matrix, see Borzeszkowski et al. (2022) for further
details. The sensitivities must be derived for each identified constitutive model, which is detailed
in Appendix. B. The influence of the global volume constraint gV = V0 −V = 0, employed in
Sec. 4.2, is taken into account implicitly in K.
As the resultant contact force vector FFE = Pcfc depends on q only through u(q), expanding
(75) yields
∂FFE(q)
∂q
= Pc
∂fc
∂u
∂u
∂q = Pc Kc
∂u
∂q = KPc
∂u
∂q ,
(83)
where Pc := [1, 1, . . . , 1] is a matrix consisting of nno blocks that sums nodal contact forces
over all Euclidean directions in the d-dimensional space, Kc is the contact contribution to the
tangent stiffness matrix, and KPc := Pc Kc.
Finally, the contributions of the regularization are derived. Differentiating the regularization
part in Eq. (71) gives
greg(q) = 2 JT
regqreg ,
(84)
where
Jreg = α L .
(85)
The Hessian becomes
Hreg(q) = 2 JT
regJreg = α2 LTL .
(86)
In practice, all residuals in (69) are concatenated into a single vector, and Eq. (71) reduces to
a scalar product. The corresponding Jacobians are concatenated accordingly.
Remark 7: If projections are applied on the FE or material dofs within the FE solver (e.g., due to
periodic boundary conditions or reduction of a 2D material mesh to 1D), they can be directly incorporated
into the tangent stiffness and global sensitivity matrices as follows
Kred = PFE K PT
FE ,
Sred = PFE S PT
m ,
(87)
where PFE and Pm are FE and material projection matrices, respectively.
39
A.2
Jacobian-vector products
Instead of computing and storing the Jacobian directly, the TRR algorithm can operate on
Jacobian-vector products, i.e., J ˆq, JT ˆU, and JT(J ˆq). All formulas below are given for a single
load case contribution. Vectors ˆq and ˆU have length of nvar and nexp, respectively. Combining
Eqs. (74), (78), and (81) for the displacements part, and Eqs. (75), (81), and (83) for the contact
part, the J ˆq product becomes















JU ˆq =
√wU
∥Uexp∥
∂UFE
∂u
λq ,
JF ˆq =
√wF
∥Fexp∥KPc λq ,
K λq = S ˆq ,
(88)
where λq is a vector with d nno components. Correspondingly, using Eqs. (74), (78), and (81),
the displacements part of JT ˆU is given by









JT
U ˆU =
√wU
∥Uexp∥ST λUU ,
KT λUU =
∂UFE
∂u
T
ˆU ,
(89)
while using Eqs. (75), (81), and (83), the contact part of JT ˆU takes the form







JT
F ˆU =
√wF
∥Fexp∥ST λUF ,
KT λUF = KT
Pc ˆU ,
(90)
where λUU and λUF are vectors of length d nno. Note that in the presence of contact K may
not be symmetric, especially for friction. The regularization parts are given by
Jreg ˆq = α Lˆq ,
JT
reg ˆU = α LT ˆU .
(91)
The mixed product JT(Jˆq) is computed as a composition of the two above.
Remark 8: In a similar manner, the contribution of a single load case to the gradient of f(q) can be
eﬀiciently computed via the adjoint formulation





gT(q) = λTS ,
KTλ = −2
∂¯Ur
∂u
T
¯Ur ,
(92)
with
∂¯Ur
∂u =


−
√wU
∥¯Uexp∥
∂¯UFE
∂u
−
√wU
∥¯Uexp∥KPc

,
(93)
see, e.g., Givoli (2021). These formulas are applicable to optimization algorithms that rely solely on the
gradient, such as L-BFGS.
40
B
Analytical sensitivities
Computation of the objective function derivatives in any form requires differentiating the inter-
nal FE forces vectors in Eqs. (35), (37), and (38) w.r.t. the material unknowns vector q. This
derivative is referred to as sensitivity matrix, and its elemental contribution is given by
Se¯e
int := ∂fe
int
∂q¯e
.
(94)
As this formula incorporates both FE and material meshes, a mapping between their elements
is required, see Sec. 2.5.2. In the case of the compressible Neo-Hookean solid model, by applying
Eq. (43) to Λ and µ, the change of the internal force vector due to a change in material unknowns
becomes
∆fe
int = ∂fe
int
∂Λ¯e ∆Λ¯e + ∂fe
int
∂µ¯e ∆µ¯e = Se¯e
Λ ∆Λ¯e + Se¯e
µ ∆µ¯e ,
(95)
where
Se¯e
Λ :=
Z
Ωe BeT IΛ ¯N¯e dv
(96)
and
Se¯e
µ :=
Z
Ωe BeT Iµ ¯N¯e dv
(97)
are the Neo-Hookean sensitivities for Λ and µ, respectively. The two vectors in (96) and (97)
are given by
IΛ := ln ˜J
˜J

1
1
1
0
0
0
T ,
Iµ := 1
˜J
 ˜B∗
11
˜B∗
22
˜B∗
33
˜B∗
12
˜B∗
13
˜B∗
23
T ,
(98)
where ˜
B∗= ˜F ˜F T −I.
Following Borzeszkowski et al. (2022), the analytical sensitivities for the Koiter shell model
follow from
∆fe
int = ∂fe
int
∂E¯e ∆E¯e + ∂fe
int
∂T¯e ∆T¯e = Se¯e
E ∆E¯e + Se¯e
T ∆T¯e ,
(99)
with
Se¯e
E :=
Z
Ωe
0

T
1 + ν NeT
,α Iαβγδ
ν
εγδ aβ +
T 3
12(1 + ν)NeT
;αβ Iαβγδ
ν
κγδ n

¯N¯e dA ,
(100)
and
Se¯e
T :=
Z
Ωe
0

E
1 + ν NeT
,α Iαβγδ
ν
εγδ aβ +
E T 2
4(1 + ν)NeT
;αβ Iαβγδ
ν
κγδ n

¯N¯e dA ,
(101)
where
Iαβγδ
ν
=
ν
1 −ν Iαβγδ
dil
+ Iαβγδ
dev
,
(102)
and
εαβ = 1
2(aαβ −Aαβ) ,
καβ = bαβ −Bαβ .
(103)
Analytical sensitivities for the Canham bending model can be found in Borzeszkowski et al.
(2022). A convenient implementation of analytical sensitivities can be achieved following the
approach shown in Duong et al. (2017).
All Se¯e
• are of size dne×¯ne and require numerical integration over the element Ωe, followed by the
local assembly with respect to ¯d unknown material parameters, and the global assembly for all
41
e = 1, . . . , nel and ¯e = 1, . . . , ¯nel. This leads to the global sensitivity matrix S with dimensions
dnno × ¯d¯nno. Since all FEs are mapped to the corresponding ME, the elemental sensitivities can
be computed within a standard element subroutine; thus, reducing the computational effort.
Remark 9: In fact, the sensitivities should be calculated in a separate element loop run after the NR
method converges. However, using S and K from the penultimate NR iteration to evaluate the objective
function derivatives does not affect their accuracy in the author’s experience.
References
Andrade-Campos, A., Thuillier, S., Martins, J., Carlone, P., Tucci, F., Valente, R., Paulo, R.
M. F., and de Sousa, R. J. A. (2020). Integrated Design in Welding and Incremental Forming:
Material Model Calibration for Friction Stir Welded Blanks. Procedia Manufacturing, 47:429–
434.
Ashkenazi, A., Shultz, A., Jordan, L., and Solav, D. (2026).
Indentation-based anisotropic
material parameter identifiability: Validation on a synthetic soft tissue phantom. Journal of
the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 208:106417.
Avril, S. (2026). Recent Advances in the Virtual Fields Method for Evaluating and Identifying
Tissue Biomechanical Properties and Constitutive Parameters.
Journal of Biomechanical
Engineering, 148.
Avril, S., Bonnet, M., Bretelle, A.-S., Grédiac, M., Hild, F., Ienny, P., Latourte, F., Lemosse,
D., Pagano, S., Pagnacco, E., and Pierron, F. (2008). Overview of Identification Methods of
Mechanical Parameters Based on Full-field Measurements. Experimental Mechanics, 48:381–
402.
Avril, S. and Pierron, F. (2007). General framework for the identification of constitutive pa-
rameters from full-field measurements in linear elasticity. International Journal of Solids and
Structures, 44:4978–5002.
Borden, M. J., Scott, M. A., Evans, J. A., and Hughes, T. J. R. (2011). Isogeometric finite
element data structures based on Bézier extraction of NURBS. International Journal for
Numerical Methods in Engineering, 87:15–47.
Borzeszkowski, B., Duong, T. X., Sauer, R. A., and Lubowiecka, I. (2021). Isogeometric Shell
Analysis of the Human Abdominal Wall.
In Gzik, M., Paszenda, Z., Pietka, E., Tkacz,
E., and Milewski, K., editors, Innovations in Biomedical Engineering, pages 11–18. Springer
International Publishing.
Borzeszkowski, B., Lubowiecka, I., and Sauer, R. A. (2022). Nonlinear material identification of
heterogeneous isogeometric Kirchhoff–Love shells. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics
and Engineering, 390:114442.
Bouclier, R., Bonnet-Eymard, R., Rabineau, E., and Réthoré, J. (2026). PINN-based identi-
fication of spatially varying elastic moduli from experimental full-Field displacement data.
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 455:118874.
Brun, R., Reichert, P., and Künsch, H. R. (2001). Practical identifiability analysis of large
environmental simulation models. Water Resources Research, 37:1015–1030.
Buljac, A., Jailin, C., Mendoza, A., Neggers, J., Taillandier-Thomas, T., Bouterf, A., Smaniotto,
B., Hild, F., and Roux, S. (2018).
Digital Volume Correlation: Review of Progress and
Challenges. Experimental Mechanics, 58:661–708.
42
Canham, P. B. (1970).
The minimum energy of bending as a possible explanation of the
biconcave shape of the human red blood cell. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 26:61–81.
Chen, B., Starman, B., Halilovič, M., Berglund, L. A., and Coppieters, S. (2024). Finite Element
Model Updating for Material Model Calibration: A Review and Guide to Practice. Archives
of Computational Methods in Engineering.
Chen, L., Zhu, G., Chen, Y., Bao, R., Lim, C. W., and Chen, W. (2026a). Contact-based high-
throughput material characterization via Kolmogorov–Arnold Transformer neural operator.
International Journal of Mechanical Sciences, 313:111308.
Chen, L., Zhu, G., Chen, Y., Lim, C. W., and Chen, W. (2026b). AI-enabled high-throughput
characterization of material properties based on indentation response. MechanoEngineering,
1:014301.
Ciarlet, P. G. (2005). An Introduction to Differential Geometry with Applications to Elasticity.
Journal of Elasticity, 78:1–215.
Coleman, T. F. and Li, Y. (1996). An interior Trust Region Approach for Nonlinear Minimiza-
tion Subject to Bounds. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 6(2):418–445.
Conn, A. R., Gould, N. I. M., and Toint, P. L. (2000). Trust Region Methods. Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
De Lorenzis, L., Wriggers, P., and Hughes, T. J. R. (2014). Isogeometric contact: a review.
GAMM-Mitteilungen, 37(1):85–123.
Dufour, J.-E., Hild, F., and Roux, S. (2015). Shape, displacement and mechanical properties
from isogeometric multiview stereocorrelation. Journal of Strain Analysis for Engineering
Design, 50(7):470–487.
Duong, T. X., Lorenzis, L. D., and Sauer, R. A. (2019).
A segmentation-free isogeometric
extended mortar contact method. Computational Mechanics, 63:383–407.
Duong, T. X., Roohbakhshan, F., and Sauer, R. A. (2017). A new rotation-free isogeometric thin
shell formulation and a corresponding continuity constraint for patch boundaries. Computer
Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 316:43–83.
Evans, S. (2017). How Can We Measure the Mechanical Properties of Soft Tissues? In Avril,
S. and Evans, S., editors, Material Parameter Identification and Inverse Problems in Soft
Tissue Biomechanics, pages 67–83. Springer.
Flaschel, M., Kumar, S., and De Lorenzis, L. (2021). Unsupervised discovery of interpretable
hyperelastic constitutive laws. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering,
381:113852.
Florentin, E. and Lubineau, G. (2010). Identification of the parameters of an elastic material
model using the constitutive equation gap method. Computational Mechanics, 46:521–531.
Fougeron, N., Oddes, Z., Ashkenazi, A., and Solav, D. (2024). Identification of constitutive
materials of bi-layer soft tissues from multimodal indentations. Journal of the Mechanical
Behavior of Biomedical Materials, 155:106572.
Gábor, A., Villaverde, A. F., and Banga, J. R. (2017). Parameter identifiability analysis and
visualization in large-scale kinetic models of biosystems. BMC Systems Biology, 11:54.
43
Givoli, D. (2021). A tutorial on the adjoint method for inverse problems. Computer Methods
in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 380:113810.
Goenezen, S., Barbone, P., and Oberai, A. A. (2011).
Solution of the nonlinear elasticity
imaging inverse problem: The incompressible case. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics
and Engineering, 200:1406–1420.
Goenezen, S., Dord, J.-F., Sink, Z., Barbone, P. E., Jiang, J., Hall, T. J., and Oberai, A. A.
(2012). Linear and Nonlinear Elastic Modulus Imaging: An Application to Breast Cancer
Diagnosis. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 31:1628–1637.
Gokhale, N. H., Barbone, P. E., and Oberai, A. A. (2008). Solution of the nonlinear elasticity
imaging inverse problem: the compressible case. Inverse Problems, 24:045010.
Haghighat, E., Raissi, M., Moure, A., Gomez, H., and Juanes, R. (2021). A physics-informed
deep learning framework for inversion and surrogate modeling in solid mechanics. Computer
Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 379:113741.
Hansen, P. C. and O’Leary, D. P. (1993). The Use of the L-Curve in the Regularization of
Discrete Ill-Posed Problems. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 14(6):1487–1503.
Hansen, P. C., Pereyra, V., and Scherer, G. (2013). Least Squares Data Fitting with Applications.
JHU Press.
Hartmann, S. and Gilbert, R. R. (2018). Identifiability of material parameters in solid mechan-
ics. Archive of Applied Mechanics, 88:3–26.
Haustrate, R., Hild, F., and Fau, A. (2025). Identifying heterogeneous elastic parameters from
full-field measurements with reduced bases. International Journal of Mechanical Sciences,
305:110682.
Hild, F. and Roux, S. (2025). On the future of experimental mechanics in the digital world: An
eikological perspective. European Journal of Mechanics - A/Solids, 113:105654.
Holzapfel, G. A. (2000). Nonlinear Solid Mechanics: A Continuum Approach for Engineering.
John Wiley & Sons.
Hughes, T. J. R., Cottrell, J. A., and Bazilevs, Y. (2005). Isogeometric analysis: CAD, finite
elements, NURBS, exact geometry and mesh refinement.
Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering, 194:4135–4195.
Kaipio, J. P. and Somersalo, E. (2005). Statistical and computational inverse problems. Springer.
Kamali, A., Sarabian, M., and Laksari, K. (2023). Elasticity imaging using physics-informed
neural networks: Spatial discovery of elastic modulus and Poisson’s ratio. Acta Biomaterialia,
155:400–409.
Kavanagh, K. T. and Clough, R. W. (1971). Finite element applications in the characterization
of elastic solids. International Journal of Solids and Structures, 7:11–23.
Khalil, A. S., Bouma, B. E., and Mofrad, M. R. K. (2006). A Combined FEM/Genetic Algorithm
for Vascular Soft tissue Elasticity Estimation. Cardiovascular Engineering, 6:93–102.
Kirchhoff, J., Luo, D., O’Leary-Roseberry, T., and Ghattas, O. (2024). Inference of Heteroge-
neous Material Properties via Infinite-Dimensional Integrated DIC. arXiv:2408.10217.
44
Koutsourelakis, P.-S. (2009).
A multi-resolution, non-parametric, Bayesian framework for
identification of spatially-varying model parameters.
Journal of Computational Physics,
228(17):6184–6211.
Kroon, M. and Holzapfel, G. A. (2008). Estimation of the distributions of anisotropic, elastic
properties and wall stresses of saccular cerebral aneurysms by inverse analysis. Proceedings
of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 464:807–825.
Kroon, M. and Holzapfel, G. A. (2009). Elastic properties of anisotropic vascular membranes
examined by inverse analysis. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering,
198:3622–3632.
Latourte, F., Chrysochoos, A., Pagano, S., and Wattrisse, B. (2008). Elastoplastic Behavior
Identification for Heterogeneous Loadings and Materials. Experimental Mechanics, 48:435–
449.
Lavigne, T., Bordas, S. P. A., and Lengiewicz, J. (2023). Identification of material parameters
and traction field for soft bodies in contact. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and
Engineering, 406:115889.
Łazorczyk, B. and Sauer, R. A. (2025). Material Identification of Heterogeneous Isogeomet-
ric Bernoulli–Euler Beams With Pretensioning.
Proceedings in Applied Mathematics and
Mechanics, 25:e70046.
Łazorczyk, B. and Sauer, R. A. (2026).
Nonlinear elastodynamic material identification of
heterogeneous isogeometric Bernoulli–Euler beams. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics
and Engineering, 448:118415.
Leygue, A., Coret, M., Réthoré, J., Stainier, L., and Verron, E. (2018). Data-based derivation
of material response. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 331:184–196.
Li, Z., Pak, D. H., Duncan, J. S., Liang, L., and Liu, M. (2026). An Integrated DNN-FEA
Approach for Inverse Identification of Passive, Heterogeneous Material Parameters of Left
Ventricular Myocardium. CMES - Computer Modeling in Engineering and Sciences, 146.
Liu, G., Wang, L., Yi, Y., Sun, L., Shi, L., and Ma, S. (2019). Inverse identification of graphite
damage properties under complex stress states. Materials & Design, 183:108135.
Liu, Y., Sun, L. Z., and Wang, G. (2005). Tomography-based 3-d anisotropic elastography using
boundary measurements. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 24:1323–1333.
Lubowiecka, I., Szepietowska, K., Tomaszewska, A., Bielski, P. M., Chmielewski, M.,
Lichodziejewska-Niemierko, M., and Szymczak, C. (2022). A novel in vivo approach to assess
strains of the human abdominal wall under known intraabdominal pressure. Journal of the
Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials, 125:104902.
Lubowiecka, I., Tomaszewska, A., Szepietowska, K., Szymczak, C., Lichodziejewska–Niemierko,
M., and Chmielewski, M. (2018). Membrane model of human abdominal wall. Simulations
vs. in vivo measurements. In Pietraszkiewicz, R. and Witkowski, J., editors, Shell Structures:
Theory and Applications, volume 4, pages 503–506. Taylor & Francis Group.
Martins, J. M. P., Andrade-Campos, A., and Thuillier, S. (2018). Comparison of inverse iden-
tification strategies for constitutive mechanical models using full-field measurements. Inter-
national Journal of Mechanical Sciences, 145:330–345.
45
Mei, Y., Kang, R., Jin, Y., Deng, J., Ma, Z., and Mao, S. (2026). Characterizing the spa-
tial heterogeneity of pre-stressed soft solids. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and
Engineering, 460:119089.
Navindaran, K., Kang, J. S., and Moon, K. (2023). Techniques for characterizing mechani-
cal properties of soft tissues. Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials,
138:105575.
Nelles, O. (2020). Nonlinear System Identification: From Classical Approaches to Neural Net-
works, Fuzzy Models, and Gaussian Processes. Springer International Publishing.
Oddes, Z. and Solav, D. (2023). Identifiability of soft tissue constitutive parameters from in-vivo
macro-indentation. Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials, 140:105708.
Pierrat, B., MacManus, D. B., Murphy, J. G., and Gilchrist, M. D. (2018). Indentation of
heterogeneous soft tissue: Local constitutive parameter mapping using an inverse method
and an automated rig. Journal of the Mechanical Behavior of Biomedical Materials, 78:515–
528.
Pierron, F. and Grédiac, M. (2012). The Virtual Fields Method: Extracting Constitutive Me-
chanical Parameters from Full-field Deformation Measurements. Springer Science & Business
Media.
Pierron, F. and Grédiac, M. (2021). Towards Material Testing 2.0. A review of test design for
identification of constitutive parameters from full-field measurements. Strain, 57(1):e12370.
Remus, R., Sure, C., Selkmann, S., Uttich, E., and Bender, B. (2024). Soft tissue material
properties based on human abdominal in vivo macro-indenter measurements. Frontiers in
Bioengineering and Biotechnology, Volume 12 - 2024.
Römer, U., Hartmann, S., Tröger, J.-A., Anton, D., Wessels, H., Flaschel, M., and Lorenzis,
L. D. (2025). Reduced and All-At-Once Approaches for Model Calibration and Discovery in
Computational Solid Mechanics. Applied Mechanics Reviews, 77.
Roohbakhshan, F. and Sauer, R. A. (2017). Eﬀicient isogeometric thin shell formulations for
soft biological materials. Biomechanics and Modeling in Mechanobiology, 16:1569–1597.
Roux, S. and Hild, F. (2020). Optimal procedure for the identification of constitutive parame-
ters from experimentally measured displacement fields. International Journal of Solids and
Structures, 184:14–23.
Sauer, R. A. (2016). A contact theory for surface tension driven systems. Mathematics and
Mechanics of Solids, 21:305–325.
Sauer, R. A. (2018). On the computational modeling of lipid bilayers using thin-shell theory.
In Steigmann, D. J., editor, The Role of Mechanics in the Study of Lipid Bilayers, pages
221–286. Springer.
Sauer, R. A. and Duong, T. X. (2017). On the theoretical foundations of thin solid and liquid
shells. Mathematics and Mechanics of Solids, 22:343–371.
Sauer, R. A., Duong, T. X., and Corbett, C. J. (2014).
A computational formulation for
constrained solid and liquid membranes considering isogeometric finite elements. Computer
Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 271:48–68.
46
Simón-Allué, R., Calvo, B., Oberai, A. A., and Barbone, P. E. (2017). Towards the mechanical
characterization of abdominal wall by inverse analysis. Journal of the Mechanical Behavior
of Biomedical Materials, 66:127–137.
Song, C., Alijani, A., Frank, T., Hanna, G., and Cuschieri, A. (2006). Elasticity of the living
abdominal wall in laparoscopic surgery. Journal of Biomechanics, 39:587–591.
Srikitrungruang, T., Fard, S. A. D., Lemon, M., Lee, J., and Zhou, Y. (2025). Robust Physics-
Informed Neural Network Approach for Estimating Heterogeneous Elastic Properties from
Noisy Displacement Data. Advanced Science, 12:e08445.
Steigmann, D. J. (2013).
Koiter’s Shell Theory from the Perspective of Three-dimensional
Nonlinear Elasticity. Journal of Elasticity, 111:91–107.
Sutton, M. A., Orteu, J. J., and Schreier, H. (2009). Image Correlation for Shape, Motion and
Deformation Measurements. Springer Science & Business Media.
Szymczak, C., Lubowiecka, I., Tomaszewska, A., and Śmietański, M. (2012). Investigation of
abdomen surface deformation due to life excitation: Implications for implant selection and
orientation in laparoscopic ventral hernia repair. Clinical Biomechanics, 27(2):105–110.
Thananjayan, P., Ramu, P., and Natarajan, S. (2023).
SBFEM and Bayesian inference for
eﬀicient multiple flaw detection in structures. Engineering Analysis with Boundary Elements,
155:226–250.
Touminet, A., Cantournet, S., Fabre, V., and Kerfriden, P. (2025). A bayesian extension to
FEMU for identification of spatially varying stochastic elastic properties from digital image
and volume correlation measurements. Journal of Computational Physics, 531:113946.
Vu-Bac, N., Duong, T. X., Lahmer, T., Areias, P., Sauer, R. A., Park, H. S., and Rabczuk,
T. (2019). A NURBS-based inverse analysis of thermal expansion induced morphing of thin
shells. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 350:480–510.
Vu-Bac, N., Duong, T. X., Lahmer, T., Zhuang, X., Sauer, R. A., Park, H. S., and Rabczuk, T.
(2018). A NURBS-based inverse analysis for reconstruction of nonlinear deformations of thin
shell structures. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 331:427–455.
Wriggers, P. (2006). Computational Contact Mechanics. Springer.
Wriggers, P. (2008). Nonlinear Finite Element Methods. Springer.
Xu, K., Zhang, N., Yin, Z.-Y., and Li, K.-Q. (2026). Hierarchical physics-guided neural network
for sparse-data heterogeneous material identification. International Journal of Mechanical
Sciences, 313:111291.
Zhang, Y., Van Bael, A., Andrade-Campos, A., and Coppieters, S. (2022). Parameter iden-
tifiability analysis: Mitigating the non-uniqueness issue in the inverse identification of an
anisotropic yield function. International Journal of Solids and Structures, 243:111543.
47
