SuperPass: Fast-Tracking Blocking Threads
to Mitigate Priority Inversion on Mobile Devices
Lei Li
City University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong, China
Yu Liang
Inria Paris
Paris, France
Riwei Pan
City University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong, China
Youcheng Sun
MBZUAI
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
Nan Guan
City University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong, China
Tei-Wei Kuo
Delta Electronics & National Taiwan
University
Taipei, Taiwan
Chun Jason Xue
MBZUAI
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
Abstract
Priority inversion occurs when a high-priority thread is de-
layed by a lower-priority one. Although well studied in real-
time systems, its impact in general-purpose OSes (e.g., An-
droid) remains underexplored. On Android, we find that
priority inversions happen frequently and can delay latency-
critical threads, degrading user experience. For example, the
foreground app’s UI thread is frequently blocked by low-
priority threads, with blocking durations of up to 210 ms,
enough to cause dropped frames. Existing solutions designed
for real-time systems fail to eliminate long priority-inversion
blockings on latency-critical threads and may introduce high
overhead on Android.
To solve this problem, we uncover two insights on An-
droid: 1) long blockings are mainly due to the accumulated
CPU waiting time of low-priority blocking threads rather
than their critical-section latency; and 2) although latency-
critical threads can be blocked by many concurrent readers,
tracking a limited number of them is sufficient to achieve
good responsiveness with low overhead in most cases. Guided
by these insights, we propose SuperPass, a lightweight ker-
nel mechanism that mitigates priority inversion by fast-track
scheduling of low-priority threads blocking latency-critical
threads. It introduces a scheduler fast track that grants imme-
diate CPU access to threads blocking latency-critical threads,
and employs a lock-level detector that effectively identifies
most such blocking threads.
We evaluate SuperPass on a Google Pixel 8 smartphone.
Taking UI thread as a case study, SuperPass decreases the
99.9th-percentile blocking duration by 72.0% and blocking
count by 47.7% on average compared to the default sched-
uler, and reduces janky frames by 29.2% with a system-wide
CPU overhead of only 0.74%. SuperPass also outperforms
existing approaches including priority inheritance, real-time
UI promotion, and Proxy Execution.
1
Introduction
The priority inversion problem occurs when a higher-priority
thread is blocked by a lower-priority thread for a potentially
unbounded period [15, 34, 35, 39, 41]. This issue typically
arises when using synchronization primitives such as mu-
texes, seqlocks, and semaphores. It is a critical and intolerable
problem in real-time systems because these systems must
meet specific deadlines [20, 42]. However, the prevalence and
severity of priority inversion problems in general-purpose
OSes such as Android remain largely unknown.
Priority inversion is prevalent and severe on Android.
To fill this gap, we first quantify priority inversions on mul-
tiple Android smartphones. Our measurements show that
the priority inversion problem on latency-critical threads
occurs commonly. As the number and complexity of applica-
tions continue to grow, the problem becomes more severe.
This indicates that mitigating priority inversion in general-
purpose OSes (e.g., Android) is necessary and urgent. In
this paper, we use the foreground app’s UI thread as a case
study of latency-critical threads. Its prolonged latency, miss-
ing the frame-rending deadline, could induce user-visible
frame drops and negatively affect user experience [4, 5].
Figure 1 shows that priority inversions on UI thread occur
frequently and can last up to 210 ms. On a 120 Hz display, a
210 ms blocking interval corresponds to at least 20% frame
loss within one second. The problem also appears in other
latency-critical threads (e.g., input dispatch, sensor process-
ing, camera pipeline control, and XR/AR tracking) because
these threads can also be blocked by low-priority threads.
Existing solutions are ineffective on Android. Exist-
ing solutions for priority inversion in real-time systems in-
clude priority ceiling protocol (PCP) and priority inheritance
(PI) [16, 21, 22, 26, 40, 41, 44]. PCP requires prior knowl-
edge of all tasks and their priorities, which is impractical for
dynamic Android workloads. PI temporarily boosts a lock
holder’s priority to that of the blocked thread. However, we
1
arXiv:2607.18097v1  [cs.OS]  20 Jul 2026
46
25
15
14
14
52
22
7
5
23
66
11
10
6
6
43
27
18
9
10
9
14
13
4
5
19
37
7
8
6
5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Tail Blocking 
Duration (ms)
P99.99 Blocking Duration (ms)
P99.9 Blocking Duration (ms)
210
(a) The 99.9th and 99.99th percentile blocking durations caused
by priority-inversion on UI thread.
392
300
166
120
79
128
54
34
34
41
43
39
70
42
07
2
00
1
34
14
13
37
8
11
2
2
9
8
6
6
2
6
0
100
200
300
400
Number of Priority 
Inversion Blockings
Number of Priority Inversion Blockings ( > 100 μs)
Number of Priority Inversion Blockings ( > 1 ms)
906
702
(b) The number of priority-inversion blockings exceeding 100 µs
and 1 ms on UI thread (one-minute testing intervals).
Figure 1. Priority inversion blockings on latency-critical
threads (foreground UI thread as a case study). Priority in-
versions can last long enough to cause frame drops.
find that existing real-time solutions fail to eliminate long
priority-inversion blockings on latency-critical threads and
can incur high overhead on Android for two reasons. First,
Android’s scheduler does not guarantee immediate CPU ac-
cess after raising priority, so a boosted blocking thread may
still wait behind other runnable threads. Second, PI is typi-
cally applied to exclusive locks with a single holder, whereas
latency-critical threads on Android are often blocked by
multiple concurrent holders, making such boosting both in-
effective and costly.
Solving priority inversion on Android is non-trivial.
Two challenges must be overcome. Accelerating blocking
threads effectively: priority boosting alone is insufficient, and
directly manipulating the scheduler’s ordering key risks in-
terfering with real-time threads and starving unrelated work
on resource-constrained mobile devices. Identifying block-
ing threads efficiently: a single priority inversion can span
multiple locks and threads through nested dependencies,
and Android’s diverse lock types and vendor-specific call
paths make per-lock instrumentation impractical. Moreover,
a latency-critical thread may be blocked by up to 24 con-
current readers, making full dependency tracking online
prohibitively expensive on mobile devices.
Key insights. We uncover two insights that help navigate
these challenges. Insight 1: runnable delays dominate priority-
inversion blockings. Long blockings are mainly due to accu-
mulated CPU waiting time of low-priority blocking threads
in the scheduler runqueue rather than their critical-section
latency–at P99.9, the gap between runnable delay and critical-
section latency reaches 1000X. This explains why PI-based
solutions are ineffective, as raising a thread’s priority has
limited impact on vruntime, the thread may still need to
remain in the runqueue for a substantial amount of time.
Insight 2: tracking a limited number of readers is sufficient.
Although latency-critical threads can be blocked by many
concurrent readers, tracking a limited number of them is
sufficient to achieve good responsiveness with low overhead
in most cases, since 98% of inversions involve fewer than 8
concurrent readers in practice.
SuperPass. Guided by these insights, we propose Super-
Pass, a lightweight kernel mechanism that mitigates priority
inversion by fast-track scheduling of low-priority threads
blocking latency-critical threads. SuperPass comprises two
co-designed components: a scheduler fast track and a lock-
level detector. The fast track grants immediate CPU access to
blocking threads by manipulating the scheduler’s ordering
key, bypassing normal scheduling competition without inter-
fering with real-time classes, and uses lightweight safeguards
that bound the scope and duration of acceleration to limit
impact on fairness. The lock-level detector efficiently iden-
tifies most blocking threads without reconstructing full de-
pendency graphs, covering both exclusive and shared locks,
alongside an offline lock-identification module that elim-
inates per-lock instrumentation by recording lightweight
sleep fingerprints at a single scheduler hook point.
Results. We evaluate SuperPass on a Google Pixel 8 smart-
phone using a variety of commonly-used applications. Tak-
ing the UI thread as a case study, the results show that Su-
perPass decreases the 99.9th-percentile blocking duration
by 72.0% and blocking count by 47.7% on average compared
to the default scheduler, and reduces janky frames by 29.2%
with a system-wide CPU overhead of only 0.74%. SuperPass
also outperforms existing approaches, including priority in-
heritance, real-time UI promotion, and Proxy Execution.
Contributions. The contributions of this paper are as fol-
lows:
• We evaluate the prevalence and impact of long priority-
inversion blockings on latency-critical threads on
Android smartphones (§ 2);
• We identify why existing solutions fail on general-
purpose OSes (§ 2), and uncover two insights to en-
able an efficient solution (§ 3);
• We propose SuperPass, a low-overhead mechanism
that efficiently identifies low-priority threads that
blocks latency-critical threads and accelerates their
execution through a novel fast-track scheduling strat-
egy (§ 4);
• We implement and evaluate SuperPass on a Google
Pixel 8 (Linux 5.15, Android 14) and observe signif-
icant reductions in blocking duration and dropped
2
frames in UI-thread instantiation compared to state-
of-the-art solutions (§ 6).
2
Background and Motivation
To study priority inversion on Android, we use the fore-
ground UI thread as a representative latency-critical thread.
It initiates frame production (input callbacks, layout, and
draw command recording) under a per-frame deadline set
by the display refresh rate (e.g., 8.3 ms at 120 Hz). Blocking
on this thread can miss the deadline and cause janky frames
(dropped or delayed frames with visible stutter) [4, 5].
2.1
Prevalence and Impact of Priority Inversions on
Android
We take the foreground UI thread as a case study to inves-
tigate the prevalence and impact of priority inversion on
Android. We evaluate the UI threads of 16 popular applica-
tions on a Google Pixel 8. In each evaluation, we interact
with one foreground app for one-minute interval, while 12
apps run concurrently in the background. We repeat this pro-
cess ten times per app and automate the interactions using
adb shell input commands.
Figure 1 shows that priority inversions occur frequently
on UI threads across popular apps. Figure 1a presents the
99.9th/99.99th percentile blocking durations with tail laten-
cies up to ∼210 ms; Figure 1b shows that each app experi-
ences priority inversions, with many exhibiting long tails
well beyond the 8.3 ms frame budget at 120 Hz, implying
dropped frames (Google Pixel 8 supports refresh rates up to
120 Hz [2]). For example, Alipay reaches P99.99 ≈210 ms with
∼906 inversions exceeding 100 µs and 207 inversion block-
ings exceeding 1 ms per minute. Across apps, > 100 µs events
occur in dozens to hundreds per run, and > 1 ms events often
exceed 30. Overall, priority inversions are common and long
enough to cause frame janks.
Janky frames directly degrade user-perceived UI smooth-
ness and responsiveness. We quantify how UI-thread priority
inversions translate into janky frames under the same setup
as Figure 1. For each one-minute run, we measure (i) the
number of priority-inversion blockings on UI threads with
blocking times exceeding 100 µs, and (ii) the number of janky
frames that overlap with these blocking intervals (i.e., janky
frames directly extended by priority inversions on UI thread
). We run each app ten times and randomly show 6 runs per
app for clarity. Figure 2 shows a clear relationship between
them: runs with more UI-thread priority inversions tend to
exhibit more janky frames, consistent across apps despite
varying per-app correlation. Across runs, the correlation is
strong (Pearson 𝑟= 0.79, Spearman 𝜌= 0.84).
2.2
Limitations of Existing Solutions
Existing Solutions for Priority Inversions. In real-time
systems, there are two types of classic existing solutions
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Number of UI priority inversion blockings (>100 µs) per run
0
100
200
300
Number of janky frames per run
Alipay
Taobao
TikTok
X
Facebook
Ctrip
Instagram
Amazon
inShorts
LinkedIn
Threads
Firefox
Shein
Weee
Booking
WaPost
Least-squares fit
95% bootstrap CI
Figure 2. Priority inversions correlate with janky frames.
Each point is one run. Points with the same marker and color
correspond to the same app. The solid line is a least-squares
fit with a 95% bootstrap confidence interval (shaded). Across
runs, the correlation is strong (Pearson 𝑟= 0.79, Spearman
𝜌= 0.84).
for priority inversion: priority inheritance (PI) and priority
ceiling protocol (PCP) [22, 26, 41]. PI temporarily raises a
low-priority lock holder to the blocked thread’s priority until
release, and to propagate this boost transitively across chains
of blocking threads. PCP assigns each lock a ceiling equal to
the highest priority of any task that may use it; a task that ac-
quires the lock runs at this ceiling until release. PCP requires
prior knowledge of all potential lock users and their prior-
ities, which is impractical in dynamic Android workloads.
Therefore, our evaluation focuses on PI. We optimize PI for
the Linux read/write semaphore (rwsem), boosting only the
priority of the writer holding the lock (writer holder).
We also evaluate an intuitive baseline that treats the UI
thread as a real-time thread (RT-UI). Android divides threads
into two classes: real-time threads (priority 0–99) and nor-
mal threads (priority 100–139). Real-time threads are sched-
uled by the real-time scheduler, while normal threads are
scheduled by CFS [18, 36]. Unlike real-time schedulers that
always select the highest-priority task, CPU scheduler on
Android (i.e., CFS) schedules threads based on virtual run-
time (vruntime) rather than only priority to balance priority
and fairness. RT-UI moves the UI thread from the normal
(CFS) class into the real-time class, allowing it to preempt
normal threads whenever it is runnable.
All experiments in this section follow the same setup and
procedure described in § 2.1. We first present experimental
results that expose the limitations of PI and RT-UI, and then
explain the two root causes of the limitations on Android.
Limitations and Penalties of Existing Solutions. Figure 3
shows P99.9 blocking duration of priority inversions on UI
threads across 16 apps (for brevity, we show only P99.9 here;
full results appear in § 6). The results show that although
PI can reduce the P99.9 blocking duration by an average of
15.6% across 16 apps, it leaves P99.9 blocking durations on
some apps over 8.3 ms, causing janky frames. PI is ineffective
on Android for two reasons. First, raising the priority of the
low-priority blocking threads did not make UI thread to run
3
on CPU instantly. Second, to reduce overhead, PI is usually
used for exclusive locks to raise the priority of one lock
holder. However, latency-critical threads on Android are
usually blocked by shared locks with multiple lock holders.
Figure 3. P99.9 blocking duration of priority inversions on
UI threads across 16 apps under Baseline, PI, and RT-UI. The
red horizontal line at 8.3 ms marks the per-frame budget at
120 Hz. A block duration exceeding this latency will miss the
120 Hz deadline and result in a dropped frame (i.e., jank).
While RT-UI benefits some apps, it degrades others. RT-
UI promotes the UI thread to the real-time class, but it does
not accelerate the low-priority blocking threads of UI thread,
so the UI thread can remain blocked. It can even extend
the priority-inversion blocking duration because it increases
real-time scheduling pressure, which leaves less CPU time
for CFS-scheduled blocking threads of UI thread to run and
release the lock. Thus, existing approaches fail to consistently
eliminate long priority-inversion blockings on UI threads.
To show existing solutions’ impact on low-priority threads
that do not block the UI thread (i.e., non-blocking threads),
we measure the P99.9 CPU waiting time (i.e., time to be
scheduled on the CPU) of non-blocking threads over each
one-minute run. Figure 4 shows that PI increases this delay
by 8.8%–88.1% (mean 32.6%) versus Baseline, while RT-UI
increases it by 0.6%–28.4% (mean 13.7%). This means that
both PI and RT-UI increase the waiting time of non-blocking
threads for CPU access. PI raises the priority of low-priority
threads whenever a priority inversion is detected. As a re-
sult, many low-priority threads with raised priority compete
for CPU time, which increases CPU waiting time of non-
blocking threads. For RT-UI, promoting the UI thread to the
real-time class allows it preempt normal threads more often,
leaving less CPU time for normal-class non-blocking threads.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
 
 
 
P99.9 CPU Waiting Time of
Non-Blocking
 
Threads (ms)
Baseline
PI
RT-UI
Figure 4. P99.9 CPU waiting time for non-blocking low-
priority threads across 16 apps under Baseline, PI, and RT-UI.
In summary, existing approaches fail to consistently elim-
inate long priority-inversion blockings on UI threads and
may increase the CPU waiting time of non-blocking threads,
thereby impacting fairness.
3
Insights and Analysis
In this section, we first breakdown the long priority-inversion
blocking duration of latency-critical threads to pinpoint
the dominant contributor. We then analyze the shared lock,
which is commonly used on Android to understand the dif-
ficulty of tracking concurrent reader holders online. Based
on this analysis, we uncover two insights that directly guide
the design of SuperPass.
3.1
Accumulated Runnable Delays Dominate
Priority Inversion Blockings
To solve priority inversion problems, we break down the
blocking duration of latency-critical threads to identify the
dominant components.
Blocking Breakdown. Figure 5(a) illustrates a represen-
tative priority-inversion blocking breakdown involving a
contended reader-writer lock (rwsem). At time 𝑇0, a latency-
critical thread (top row) requests the lock and begins waiting.
The lock is held by a set of low-priority reader holders and
may also be delayed by queued waiters (e.g., a writer). The
latency-critical thread can acquire the lock only after all cur-
rent reader holders release it and any queued waiters ahead
of it have completed and released the lock, at T1. For each
blocking thread on the critical dependency chain, the time
to reach lock release consists of (i) its on-CPU execution
(running), (ii) time spent sleeping (e.g., waiting for I/O or
another lock), and (iii) runnable delay after wakeups. We
call a thread’s waiting time in CPU scheduler runqueue a
runnable delay: the time from when a thread is enqueued on
the runqueue to when it first runs on a CPU core. Figure 5(a)
shows concurrent readers running on different CPU cores,
so the latency-critical thread waits for the slowest reader. In
the worst case, if multiple readers are serialized on one core,
their delays can accumulate and further extend the blocking
duration.
Quantifying runnable-delay accumulation and critical-
section latency. Profiling 16 popular apps under a realistic
load (one foreground app with 12 background apps for one
minute), we quantify both runnable delays and the lock-
holding critical-section latency, and show how runnable
delays accumulate along the critical path. First, a single
runnable delay often reaches the millisecond scale, frequently
exceeds 50 ms, and has P99.9 up to 183 ms (Figure 6). In con-
trast, the corresponding critical-section latencies are typi-
cally in the microsecond-to-millisecond range, with P99.9
up to 171 µs, yielding up to a 1000× gap (Figure 6). At P90
the gap is around 100×.
4
Sleeping
Sleeping
Runnable
Runnable
Get Lock
Release Lock
Latency-critical Thread
Low-prio Reader 1
Low-prio Reader 2
Low-prio Reader N
Time
Running
Running
Latency-critical Thread
Low-prio Reader 1
Low-prio Reader 2
Time
T0
T1
Reduced
Blocking Duration
(a) Default Priority
T0
T1
-inversion Blocking Breakdown
 
 
 
 
 
(b) Priority-inversion Blocking Breakdown
 
with SuperPass
Low-prio Reader N
Figure 5. Priority-inversion blocking breakdown. SuperPass
reduces the runnable delay of low-priority reader holders,
and thus shortens the priority-inversion blocking duration
of the latency-critical thread.
Figure 6. Critical-section latency vs. runnable delay across
16 apps. The x-axis uses a logarithmic scale to cover latencies
from nanoseconds to seconds. The bold curves are calculated
from all results merged across the 16 apps, while the light
curves show the per-trace results for individual app. At P99.9,
runnable delay is 1000× of critical-section latency.
Second, one blocking thread can incur multiple runnable
delays within one priority inversion because it may repeat-
edly sleep (e.g., waiting for I/O or another lock) and wake be-
fore releasing the lock; each wakeup re-enqueues the thread
and may incur a runnable delay. We observe that 13.2% of
blocking threads have such repeated sleep-wake behavior
(see supplementary file), amplifying the accumulation of
runnable delay. Third, one priority inversion often involves
multiple blocking threads (e.g., multiple concurrent reader
lock holders and queued lock waiters), further compounding
runnable delays on the latency-critical threads’ critical path
(Figures 7). Based on these results, we uncover a new insight.
Insight 1: Runnable delays of blocking threads induced
by general-purpose OSes’ (e.g., Android) schedulers domi-
nate the priority inversion blocking duration of latency-
critical threads.
This insight helps explain why priority inheritance (PI)-
based solutions are ineffective on Android. They raise the
priority of a low-priority thread but do not guarantee to de-
crease its runnable delays. PI assumes priority-driven sched-
uling, where elevating priority instantly translate into CPU
access, but Android’s CFS schedules threads by vruntime for
fairness. Thus, even after PI raises a blocking thread’s prior-
ity, it may still wait behind other runnable threads, resulting
in long blocking durations for latency-critical threads.
3.2
Tracking Reader Holders is Feasible on Android
To understand the complexity and overhead of identifying
all reader holders online, we analyze how many concur-
rent readers a thread typically has in practice. Based on
profiling results from a Google Pixel 8 running multiple com-
monly used apps, we make two observations. First, Android
apps heavily use shared locks such as rwsem, where latency-
critical threads could be blocked by many concurrent reader
holders, up to 24, as shown in Figure 7. Second, in most cases,
the number of concurrent reader holders is small, with 98%
having fewer than 8. This likely reflects the limited hard-
ware parallelism and practical concurrency of smartphone
workloads (e.g., our tested smartphone has 9 CPU cores).
0
5
10
15
20
25
Number of Reader Holders Blocking UI Thread
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
CDF
Alipay
Taobao
Tiktok
X
Facebook
Ctrip
Instagram
Inshorts
LinkedIn
Threads
Firefox
Amazon
Shein
Weee
Booking
WaPost
Figure 7. Concurrent reader holders blocking UI thread are
usually small (≈98% have ≤8.)
In real-time systems, meeting strict deadlines often re-
quires identifying and accelerating all reader holders that
can block a latency-critical thread. Our experiments on An-
droid show in Figure 7, where we found up to 24 concurrent
readers. Identifying all reader holders can incur substantial
overhead and complicate worst-case blocking bounds and
schedulability analysis. However, Android’s latency-critical
threads target responsiveness rather than strict hard-real-
time guaranties, so it is practical to track and accelerate only
a few readers that cover most cases to reduce overhead.
Insight 2: On Android, although latency-critical threads
could be blocked by many readers, tracking a limited
number of readers suffices to achieve good responsive-
ness while maintaining low overhead in most cases.
This insight is mostly applicable to mobile devices, which
have a relatively low number of CPU cores and limited hard-
ware parallelism. On platforms with many more CPU cores
and higher concurrency, a latency-critical thread may be
blocked by a much larger set of concurrent readers across
5
multi-layer dependency chains, making online tracking more
costly and bounded tracking less effective.
4
Design of SuperPass
As discussed above, priority inversion can block latency-
critical threads (e.g., the UI, input dispatch, and camera
pipeline control threads) and thus severely hurt responsive-
ness on Android. This paper proposes SuperPass, a light-
weight kernel mechanism that mitigates such blocking by
identifying low-priority blocking threads and accelerating
their execution, allowing them to release locks earlier.
Overview. Figure 8 presents the design overview of Super-
Pass, which comprises four components: (i) a scheduler fast
track (§ 4.1.1) that instantly accelerates the execution of low-
priority threads blocking the latency-critical threads (blue
panel in Figure 8); (ii) scheduler safeguards (§ 4.1.2) that
bound the acceleration and limit impact on non-blocking
threads (blue panel); (iii) a lock-level detector (§ 4.2.1) that
identifies blocking threads of the latency-critical threads (yel-
low panel); and (iv) a portable lock-identification module
(§ 4.2.2) that identifies the locks where the latency-critical
threads block on (gray panel).
yes
Thread 
Labels
Locks
obtain label info
Scheduler Fast Track
Scheduler Normal Path
labeled?
CPU Scheduler 
Runqueue 
Tree
Blocking Detector
Tail
Request lock
yes
blocking 
Recorded
label blocking threads
record 
holders
Wait 
Queue
Curr
enqueue to head
❶
❷
❸ 
❹ 
❺ 
Offline Identification
Runtime Path
Requester 
Thread
Lock 1
...
UI-Blocking 
Lock Set
Trace & Analyzer
Offline UI-Blocking 
Lock Identification
Instant speed up
 
❻
Instant speed up
 
❻
1. Blocking threads cap
2. Reader cap 
3. Short lease+decay
Safeguards
no
Blocking thread
detected?
Blocking thread
detected?
outputs
 ❼
threads
Figure 8. Design overview of SuperPass.
4.1
Fast-Track Scheduling for Blocking Threads
Guided by Insight 1, SuperPass focuses on the dominant
contributor to long priority-inversion blockings: scheduler
induced runnable delays of blocking threads. SuperPass
therefore accelerates blocking threads in the scheduler to cut
their runnable delays using a scheduler fast track. However,
this path can increase contention and delay unrelated work.
Thus, we add lightweight safeguards to limit how many low-
priority threads are expedited and for how long.
4.1.1
Fast Track: Accelerating Blocking Threads. A
naive solution to long blockings on latency-critical threads is
to make all blocking threads real-time, but this risks fairness
for other real-time tasks, especially when many blocking
threads are present. Instead, we design a fast track mecha-
nism that allows designated low-priority blocking threads to
bypass normal scheduling competition and run immediately,
without interfering with real-time classes. As illustrated
in Figure 5 (b), accelerating the blocking thread reduces
its runnable delays (red rectangles) and thus shortens the
priority-inversion blockings of the latency-critical threads.
Android CFS schedules threads based on virtual run-
time (vruntime) rather than priority. vruntime represents the
amount of CPU time a thread has consumed relative to its
weight. CFS tries to allocate each thread the same amount of
virtual runtime to enforce fairness, so it always selects the
thread with the smallest vruntime. In this case, a thread with
raised priority may still wait in the runqueue for a long time
if its vruntime remains larger than others.
To address this issue, SuperPass moves labeled block-
ing threads to the head of the runqueue order so they run
sooner. We will introduce how SuperPass identifies and la-
bels blocking threads in §4.2. Specifically, SuperPass adds
a per-thread flag in the kernel task structure. Only threads
with this flag use the fast track, and all other threads fol-
low normal scheduling. The fast track operates as follows.
When a labeled blocking thread is enqueued to the sched-
uler runqueue (Step 6 in Figure 8), its scheduling metric
(e.g., vruntime in CFS) is reset to place it at the head of the
runqueue for immediate scheduling (Step 7 ). Once the pri-
ority inversion ends, the label is cleared and its original state
is restored. In addition, the labeled blocking thread is pro-
tected from involuntary preemption (e.g., by suppressing
timeslice expiration), ensuring it can complete its critical
section promptly. These changes reduce the runnable delay
of threads blocking latency-critical threads, allowing them
to run on the CPU earlier and release locks sooner.
4.1.2
Safeguarding Fairness. Blindly accelerating many
blocking threads at once (e.g., concurrent reader holders and
queued waiters) can increase CPU competition among them
and significantly delay other unrelated threads. To reduce the
interference on those unrelated threads, previous approaches
employ complicated and high overhead reservation frame-
works [3, 13, 33]. However, the overhead is too large for
mobile devices, thus we use three lightweight safeguards to
bound who is expedited and for how long:
(i) Limit the scope of the acceleration to the latency-critical
threads’ blocking threads only. Unlike PI, which blindly boosts
the priority of any low-priority lock holder that blocks a
higher-priority task, SuperPass accelerates only the low-
priority threads blocking the latency-critical threads. Threads
not blocking the latency-critical threads are never acceler-
ated to limit the impact on unrelated threads;
(ii) Cap on fast-track threads. Limit the number of fast-
track blocking threads to one fewer than the available on-
line CPU cores, ensuring at least one core remains available
6
for non-blocking threads while avoiding CPU competition
among fast-track blocking threads;
(iii) Deadline-aligned acceleration lease. Revoke labels at
least once per latency budget interval 𝑇budget, because accel-
eration is intended to shorten the latency-critical threads’
blocking duration, rather than to keep blocking threads con-
tinuously accelerated. On revocation, restore the thread’s
original scheduling metric and apply a short cool-down pe-
riod before re-labeling to avoid immediate repeated acceler-
ation of the same thread.
These safeguards bound the scope and duration of fast
track acceleration, preserving system-wide responsiveness
while retaining the gains from fast-track scheduling.
Implementation. For UI-thread instantiations, 𝑇budget is set
to the frame interval (e.g., 16.7 ms at 60 Hz and 8.3 ms at
120 Hz). For other latency-critical threads, it can be set to the
corresponding service deadline or latency target. We set the
cool-down period to 1 ms for the UI-thread instantiation as a
small fraction of the frame budget (8.3–16.7 ms). This is long
enough to prevent immediate repeated re-acceleration of the
same blocking thread, but short enough to allow re-labeling
within the same frame if the thread blocks the UI thread
again.
4.2
Identifying Blocking Threads and Locks
In § 4.1, we showed how SuperPass reduces blocking du-
ration on latency-critical threads once the right blocking
threads are identified. This section describes how we identify
blocking threads and the locks on which they are blocked.
4.2.1
Lightweight Identification of Blocking Threads.
A single priority inversion can span multiple locks and threads,
so reconstructing full dependencies online is expensive.
However, guided by Insight 2, we avoid full depen-
dency tracking on Android to identify lock holders with
low overhead. Concretely, our lock-level scheme (i) labels
only a bounded set of low-priority holders, and (ii) bypasses
lock waiters. We classify participants at a contended lock
into holders (writer/reader holders) and waiters, and han-
dle them differently because holders already own the lock,
while waiters have not acquired it yet. We first present the
detection and labeling workflow, and then describe how we
handle different lock participants (holders vs. waiters) under
contention.
Detection and Labeling Workflow. Algorithm 1 illustrates
how we deal with holders and waiters. The detector runs
only when a lock acquisition fails (Line 3; Step 1 in Figure 8).
It first checks whether the requester is the latency-critical
thread or if it is labeled before (Line 4), then verifies that the
current holder has lower priority (Line 5; Step 2 ). If both
conditions hold, the holder is recorded (Step 3 ) and labeled
(Step 4 ) to use the scheduler fast track (Line 6). Waiters are
bypassed by placing the request thread at the head of the
wait queue (Lines 9-10; Step 5 ). When the blocked requester
eventually acquires the lock, the label is cleared (Lines 11-
12). In Line 5, we also check the "already labeled" thread
because the “already labeled” predicate propagates critical-
ity transitively along dependency chains (i.e., if a thread is
labeled because it blocks the latency-critical threads or a pre-
viously labeled thread, then any holder that now blocks this
requester is blocking thread of the latency-critical threads.)
This gives us multi-hop coverage (nested locks, subsystem
calls) without building a full dependency graph.
Algorithm 1 Lock-Level Labeling of Blocking Threads
1: Input: Curr = thread requesting the lock;
2: Init: lock_holder;
⊲set to record labeled lock holder
3: On Curr lock request failed:
4: if Curr is latency-critical thread or already labeled then
5:
if Curr has lower priority than lock_holder then
6:
record lock_holder and label it;
7:
end if
8: end if
9: On Curr start waiting:
10:
Place Curr at the head of the lock’s wait queue;
11: On Curr lock request succeed:
12:
Clear the label of the recorded lock_holder;
Lock Holders. Identifying lock holders is straightforward
for mutexes because there is a single owner, which is stored
in a variable (each thread getting a lock will set the variable,
and clear the variable when it releases the lock). However,
for shared locks like rwsem, multiple readers may hold the
lock concurrently, as shown in Figure 7. In real-time systems,
accelerating all concurrent readers is needed to meet dead-
lines. However, tracking all readers by inserting/removing
an owner record on every acquire/release incurs substan-
tial CPU and memory overhead [1]. In contrast, Android’s
latency-critical threads target responsiveness rather than
hard real-time guarantee. Guided by Insight 2, we therefore
track only a limited set of reader holders with low over-
head, up to 𝑁CPU −1), which covers most cases. All recorded
holders are labeled and accelerated via the scheduler fast
track.
Lock Waiters. Lock holders already own the lock and are
executing the critical section, so the blocked latency-critical
thread must wait for them to release it and cannot bypass
them. In contrast, queued waiters ahead of the latency-critical
thread have not acquired the lock yet, so we can bypass these
waiters and let the latency-critical thread proceed immedi-
ately after the current lock holders release the lock.
4.2.2
Identification of Blocking Locks. Before identi-
fying blocking threads, we first need to identify the con-
tended locks on which the latency-critical thread blocks. Do-
ing so is difficult on Android because many lock types and
vendor-specific call paths make per-lock instrumentation im-
practical. We take advantage of an interesting observation:
long priority-inversion blockings are dominated by sleepable
7
locks. We refer to locks that put contending threads to sleep
(e.g., rwsem) as sleepable locks, which makes their blockers
sleep, later wake up, and may incur long runqueue delays be-
fore running again. In contrast, spinlocks busy-wait and do
not trigger this sleep–wake–runqueue pattern. Our profiling
results show that across 16 apps, spinlock contention has a
P99.99 acquisition latency of 660 ± 282 µs, while contended
rwsem acquisitions reach up to 210 ms (Figure 1a).
Guided by this observation, We take advantage of a com-
mon property of sleepable locks that under contention, a
blocking thread eventually enters the scheduler’s shared
sleep path. Thus, SuperPass records a lightweight “sleep
fingerprint” at the single scheduler sleep point and aggre-
gates these fingerprints offline to identify the lock APIs most
responsible for blockings on latency-critical threads.
These offline results remain valid as long as the kernel
and vendor lock implementations and their sleep paths re-
main unchanged. The same contended lock operations con-
tinue to pass through the same scheduler sleep point and
produce the same fingerprints. Offline lock-identification
analysis needs to be be re-run upon major kernel or vendor
updates that may change lock implementations or call paths.
This approach eliminates per-lock instrumentation and re-
duces profiling effort. It is portable because it relies only on
the scheduler’s shared sleep path, which is common across
many systems.
Implementation. We implement a bounded per-lock holder
list to record the lock holders. To allow the latency-critical
thread bypass queued waiters, we place it at the head of the
lock’s waiter queue, ahead of ordinary waiters. On the An-
droid kernel, the scheduler’s shared sleep path goes through
__schedule(). Thus, we hook __schedule() to identify
the locks blocking latency-critical threads, specifically right
before a sleeping thread is switched out (i.e., just before
context_switch()). We grab a short “fingerprint” of why
the thread is going to sleep: we record one stack frame
at a chosen depth (stackNum) using my_dump_stack(sym,
stackNum) and write the corresponding kernel symbol (sym)
into the trace log. Each sleep therefore produces a stable ker-
nel symbol sym that points to the blocking primitive on the
sleep path (e.g., down_write() for a contended rwsem write).
We then aggregate these symbols offline to identify the lock
APIs that dominate latency-critical threads’ blocking.
4.3
Generality and Limitations
Generality. SuperPass is applicable to priority inversions
on different latency-critical threads (e.g., UI thread, input
dispatch, sensor processing, camera pipeline control, and
XR/AR tracking). SuperPass is also not tied to a specific
scheduler. Its core requirement is a fast track that promptly
runs labeled blocking threads by adjusting the scheduler’s
native ordering key. For example, on Android CFS, it lowers
a labeled thread’s vruntime; on Linux EEVDF [12], it can
similarly adjust a labeled thread’s eligibility time and virtual
deadline so that the thread is selected to run on CPU earlier.
Limitations. SuperPass shortens only scheduler-induced
delays (i.e., runnable delays). It does not reduce the block-
ing thread’s critical-section latency and the time spent on
sleeping (e.g., sleep for I/O). We currently scope to a sin-
gle latency-critical thread, and arbitration across multiple
concurrent latency-critical threads is left to future work.
5
Evaluation Setup
In this section, we present the experimental platform, com-
parison mechanisms, workloads, and evaluation metrics.
5.1
Experimental Platform
Our main experimental platform is a commercial smartphone,
Google Pixel 8, with 8 GB DRAM, 128 GB flash storage, and 9
CPU cores (1×3.0 GHz Cortex-X3, 4×2.45GHz Cortex-A715,
4×2.15 GHz Cortex-A510). The device runs Android 14 with
Linux 5.15, where CFS is the default scheduler. Following
previous reviewers’ comments, we use a high-end smart-
phone with a relatively new Android version to show that
the priority-inversion problem remains prevalent and severe
on modern mobile devices. We also measure priority inver-
sions on a Pixel 5 to show that the problem is not unique to
Pixel 8, but is general across mobile devices. In this paper, we
present the main results on Pixel 8, and include the Pixel 5
results in the supplementary materials.
5.2
Comparison Mechanisms
We extensively compare our solution to the default kernel
on Android, PI, RT-UI, and PE (state-of-the-art):
Baseline: We use the default Android kernel without modi-
fication, which runs Linux 5.15 kernel. The task scheduling
scheme is widely used in modern mobile devices.
Priority Inheritance (PI): To reduce penalty, we implement
and optimize priority inheritance for rwsem1 by boosting the
priority of the low-priority writer holding the lock when only
higher-priority latency-critical thread is blocked. Thus, we
eliminate the overhead associated with the global adoption
of traditional priority inheritance. The boost is applied by
adjusting the holder’s scheduling priority within CFS (i.e.,
prio value), without changing the scheduler class. The boost
is revoked when the lock is released.
Real-time UI (RT-UI): We implement an intuitive solution
that promotes the foreground app’s UI thread to a real-time
scheduling class while it is in the foreground and restores
its priority when it goes to the background. No changes are
made to lock holders or synchronization.
1UI threads are usually blocked on this lock. We take UI threads as a case
study in our experiments.
8
Proxy Execution (PE): 2 For fair comparison, we adapt PE
to rwsem based on the original mutex-oriented design [9].
When a latency-critical thread blocks on a rwsem, PE ran-
domly chooses a lock holder to run instead of itself. PE han-
dles one-to-one blocking but does not accelerate multiple
concurrent readers in shared-lock scenarios.
SuperPass: Our solution SuperPass is also implemented
on rwsem. First, it makes the identified blocking threads run
on CPU instantly via a scheduler fast track. Thus, its perfor-
mance outperforms the above mechanism. Second, it iden-
tifies most blocking threads (e.g., concurrent lock holders)
of latency-critical threads with low overhead via a bounded
list of lock holders.
In summary, PI and RT-UI capture two naive approaches:
boosting the lock holder or prioritizing the latency-critical
thread. PE represents the closest fair-scheduler-aware mech-
anism that accelerates blocking threads. Other approaches,
such as PCP or reservation-based scheduling methods (e.g.,
SCHED_DEADLINE), require different system assumptions
(e.g., static task sets or explicit runtime/deadline assign-
ments) and are therefore discussed in §8 rather than used as
evaluation baselines.
5.3
Workloads and Evaluation Metrics
Workloads. We use 16 apps across diverse categories (Ta-
ble 1) as foreground applications. We exclude games, as their
rendering workloads bypass the UI thread [4, 8, 10], which
we use as a case study of latency-critical threads in our eval-
uation. To avoid human bias in testing, we use automated
scripts to interact with these foreground apps via adb shell
input commands, ensuring reproducible user interactions. In
each test, we run 12 apps concurrently in the background to
approximate realistic user behavior [27, 32]. All experimen-
tal results in Sections § 2, § 3, and § 6.1 are obtained using
these realistic workloads.
Table 1. Sixteen Tested Applications
Application Category
Applications
Social Media
Facebook, X, LinkedIn, Threads
Short Video
Tiktok, Instagram
Online Shopping
Amazon, Shein, Weee, Taobao
Browsing & News
Firefox, Inshorts, WaPost
Booking & Lifestyle
Booking, Ctrip, Alipay
1 WaPost represents Washington Post.
Evaluation Metrics. We measure a latency-critical thread’s
priority-inversion blocking duration directly in the kernel
by recording two timestamps around the lock acquisition.
When a latency-critical thread attempts to acquire a lock and
finds it held by a lower-priority thread, we take a start times-
tamp using ktime_get(). When the latency-critical thread
2Due to porting constraints, PE is evaluated on an x86 Cuttlefish Android
virtual device [7] configured to emulate Pixel 8’s 9-core CPU. In § 6.3,
Proxy Execution and SuperPass are both evaluated on Cuttlefish to
ensure a fair comparison.
acquires the lock successfully, we take an end timestamp and
compute the elapsed time as the priority-inversion blocking
duration, and report it via a customized ftrace tracepoint.
We report three complementary metrics:
• P99.9 Blocking Duration (ms): the 99.9th percentile of
blocking durations of priority inversions on UI thread,
capturing the key scenarios that are affected by priority
inversion;
• Number of Priority Inversion Blockings (>100 µs)3: the
number of priority inversion blockings exceeding 100 µs
per minute, indicating how often noticeable delays occur;
• Number of Janky Frames: the number of dropped frames
caused by priority inversions on UI thread, collected by
Android dumpsys framestats [6], directly reflecting user-
perceived UI smoothness.
Each foreground app was tested in ten one-minute runs. We
report P99.9 Blocking Duration over all runs. For Number of
Priority Inversion blocking (>100 µs) and Number of Janky
Frames, we report the average across runs with error bars
showing minimum and maximum values.
6
Evaluation Results
In this section, we comprehensively evaluate the effective-
ness of SuperPass, using UI threads as a case study and
reduced janky frames as the user-experience metric. § 6.1
presents the main results, including reductions in priority-
inversion counts and durations, improvements in janky frames,
and the fairness impact on non-blocking threads. § 6.2 eval-
uates robustness under heavier background workloads. § 6.3
compares SuperPass with Proxy Execution (PE).
6.1
Performance Improvement
To evaluate the effectiveness of SuperPass, we use three
metrics. § 6.1.1 reports the overall performance on reducing
the number and duration of priority-inversion blockings
on the latency-critical thread (UI thread in our evaluation).
§ 6.1.2 measures its impact on user experience, and § 6.1.3
then verifies fairness impact on non-blocking threads.
6.1.1
Overall Performance. Figures 9b and 9a compare
SuperPass with Baseline, PI, and RT-UI under a realistic
workload (one foreground app with 12 background apps).
On average, SuperPass achieves a 72.0% reduction on P99.9
blocking duration across 16 apps compared to Baseline and
delivers a 4.6× improvement over PI. RT-UI increases tail
latencies in some cases because raising UI thread to real-
time priority reduces CPU time for CFS-scheduled blocking
threads of UI thread. For the number of UI-thread priority
3The 100 µs is used as a filtering threshold to exclude trivial events
and focus on non-negligible priority inversions. These blockings matter
because they can accumulate and, when overlapping the frame critical
path, cause janky frames as shown in § 2.1.
9
0
10
20
30
40
50
Alipay
Taobao
TikTok
X
Facebook
Ctrip
Instagram Amazon
Baseline
PI
RT-UI
SuperPass
0
5
10
15
20
inShorts LinkedIn Threads
Firefox
Shein
Weee
Booking
WaPost
P99.9 Blocking Duration (ms) 
(a) The 99.9th percentile durations of UI-thread priority-inversion
blocking. Bars above the red line in 8.3 ms indicate risk of causing
dropped frames.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Alipay
Taobao
TikTok
X
Facebook
Ctrip
Instagram Amazon
Baseline
PI
RT-UI
SuperPass
0
30
60
90
120
150
inShorts LinkedIn Threads
Firefox
Shein
Weee
Booking
WaPost
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of Priority Inversion
 
Blockings
 
(>100
 
μs) 
(b) The number of UI-thread priority inversions (> 100 µs).
Figure 9. Overall performance (UI-thread instantiation). The
duration and number of UI-thread priority-inversion block-
ings on Baseline, PI, RT-UI, and SuperPass.
inversion blocking, SuperPass achieves a 47.7% reduction
relative to Baseline, corresponding to 2.2× fewer blocks than
PI and 2.5× fewer than RT-UI. SuperPass reduces the dura-
tion longer than > 100 µs by effectively accelerating blocking
threads of UI thread. In conclusion, these results demonstrate
that SuperPass more effectively mitigates both the number
and duration of priority-inversion blockings on UI thread.
Variation Across Apps. Figures 9 show that the severity
of priority inversion on UI thread varies widely across apps.
Figure 10 suggests that this depends on lock-acquisition in-
tensity. Apps like Alipay produce thousands of lock requests
and thus face more priority inversions, while Firefox ac-
quires fewer locks and correspondingly has fewer priority
inversions. These results indicate that lock-acquisition in-
tensity is a key factor in an app’s susceptibility to severe
priority-inversion blockings on UI thread.
Performance Breakdown. As described in § 4.2.1, a con-
tended lock can delay the latency-critical thread through
three kinds of lock participants: (i) a writer holder that
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Number of 
Lock Requests
Figure 10. Number of lock requests issued by the foreground
app’s UI thread (each test runs for one minute).
currently owns the lock, (ii) queued waiters ahead of the
requester, and (iii) reader holders that collectively hold a
shared lock. SuperPass handles them with three correspond-
ing mechanisms: Writers Acceleration labels and expedites
a writer holder via the scheduler fast track; Waiters Bypass
places the blocked latency-critical thread at the head of the
lock’s wait queue; Readers Acceleration does the same for a
bounded set of reader holders.
We quantify the contribution of these three mechanisms
by enabling them incrementally. Figure 11 breaks down the
resulting improvement. For each app, we normalize the total
improvement over the baseline to 100%, and the stacked bars
show the fraction of this total attributable to the three com-
ponents. In Figure 11a, averaged across apps, Writers Accel-
eration, Waiters Bypass, and Readers Acceleration contribute
44.4%, 29.2%, and 26.4% of the total reduction in the P99.9
priority-inversion blocking duration on UI thread, respec-
tively. In Figure 11b, the corresponding shares for reducing
the number of priority-inversion blocking events (> 100 µs)
are 58.3%, 31.2%, and 10.4%. Contributions vary across apps
because their lock-contention patterns and read/write mixes
differ.
6.1.2
User Experience Impact: Janky Frame. To evalu-
ate SuperPass’s user-experience impact, we measured janky
frames under the same setup as in § 6.1.1. Figure 12 shows
that SuperPass reduces the number of janky frames by 29.2%
compared with the Baseline on average, which corresponds
to 2.1× fewer janky frames than PI and 4.1× fewer than RT-
UI. RT-UI even increased the janky frames for some apps,
as it may block other important system real-time threads.
In conclusion, SuperPass consistently outperforms PI and
RT-UI across all 16 apps in reducing janky frames.
6.1.3
Faireness Impact on Non-Blocking Threads. To
evaluate the faireness impact of SuperPass on non-blocking
threads, we measure their runnable delays under the same re-
alistic setup as in § 6.1.1. Figure 13 reports the P99.9 runnable
delays of low-priority non-blocking threads across 16 apps.
PI increases the P99.9 runnable delay by 32.6% on average,
indicating longer blocking for threads not blocking UI thread.
RT-UI also raises this metric by 13.7% on average. In contrast,
SuperPass increases this metric by only 4.7% on average,
resulting in nearly baseline-level overhead across all apps.
10
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Contribution of Design 
Components (%)
Writers Acceleration
Waiters Bypass
Readers Acceleration
(a) The P99.9 priority-inversion blockings on UI thread.
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Contribution of Design 
Components (%)
Writers Acceleration
Waiters Bypass
Readers Acceleration
(b) The number of priority-inversion blockings exceeding 100 µs
on UI thread.
Figure 11. Performance breakdown.
Figure 12. Number of janky frames (normalized to Baseline).
In conclusion, these results show that SuperPass have small
faireness impact on non-blocking threads, consistent with
the safeguards in § 4.1.2. Although strict fairness cannot be
guaranteed, SuperPass still outperforms existing methods
by respecting smartphone workloads where foreground apps
and UI threads are prioritized for user experience.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
 
 
P99.9 Runnable Delay of 
Non-Blocking Threads (ms)
Baseline
PI
RT-UI
SuperPass
Figure 13. P99.9 runnable delay of low-priority threads not
blocking UI thread across 16 apps.
6.2
Performance under Heavy Workloads
To emulate heavy usage, we add a synthetic CPU workload
with busy-loop workers pinned to cores. We use this work-
load only in this subsection to evaluate SuperPass under
heavier background contention and to verify both its robust-
ness and fairness impact on non-blocking threads.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
0/9
2/9
4/9
6/9
P99.9 Blocking 
Duration (ms)
Baseline
PI
RT-UI
ass
P
Super
0
500
1000
1500
0/9
2/9
4/9
6/9
Number of Priority
 
 
 
Inversion Blockings
(>100  μs)
0
50
100
150
200
250
0/9
2/9
4/9
6/9
0
50
100
150
200
250
0/9
2/9
4/9
6/9
Number of 
Janky Frames
0
50
100
150
0/9
2/9
4/9
6/9
0
20
40
60
80
0/9
2/9
4/9
6/9
Alipay 
Alipay 
Alipay 
Facebook 
Facebook 
Facebook 
Figure 14. Performance under heavy workload. Each row
reports, from top to bottom, the P99.9 blocking duration, the
number of blocks >100 µs, and the number of janky frames
for Alipay and Facebook. The x-axis “𝑘/9” denotes that 𝑘of
the 9 CPU cores are preoccupied by the busy-loop workers.
Specifically, We pin 𝑘∈{2, 4, 6} busy-loop workers to
distinct cores while running 12 background apps concur-
rently in the background. All busy-loop workers are normal
threads scheduled by CFS. Figure 14 reports two represen-
tatives: Alipay (many lock requests, frequent inversions)
and Facebook (fewer lock requests). We report all results of
16 apps in the supplementary file. In conclusion, across all
workloads, SuperPass consistently reduces the number and
duration of priority-inversion blockings on UI thread, and
correspondingly lowers the number of janky frames, relative
to Baseline, PI, and RT-UI, demonstrating robustness under
heavy background contention.
We also assess fairness impact on non-blocking threads
using the P99.9 runnable delay under heavy background
workload with 𝑘= 6/9 cores occupied. Figure 15 shows
that SuperPass remains close to Baseline across apps (3.6%
increase), while PI and RT-UI raise the runnable delay of
non-blocking threads by 27.7% and 14.5%, respectively. In
conclusion, the results confirms that our safeguards limit the
impact of SuperPass on the fairness of non-blocking threads,
even under severe CPU contention.
6.3
Comparison with Proxy Execution
We compare SuperPass against Proxy Execution (PE) [23, 24]
on Cuttlefish (9 vCPUs, 8 GB RAM) over five foreground apps
with 12 background apps. PE is difficult to deploy directly
on Pixel 8 due to porting constraints, as it was originally
designed and implemented for Linux kernel mutexes rather
than Android’s rwsem.
11
0
3000
6000
9000
12000
15000
 
 
P99.9 Runnable Delay of 
Non-Blocking Threads (ms)
Baseline
PI
RT-UI
SuperPass
Figure 15. P99.9 runnable delay of low-priority threads not
blocking UI thread across 16 apps, under heavy background
workload with 6 busy-loop workers.
0
5
10
15
20
25
P99.9 Blocking 
Duration (ms)
Baseline
Proxy Execution
SuperPass
0
20
40
60
80
Number of Priority 
Inversion Blockings
(>100
 
μs)
Baseline
Proxy Execution
SuperPass
Figure 16. Comparison with Proxy Execution on Cuttlefish.
Figure 16 shows that PE reduces the number of priority
inversions on UI thread with blocking duration longer than
100 µs by 20.6% and the P99.9 blocking duration by 14.0%.
In comparison, SuperPass achieves reductions of 53.7% and
51.0% (i.e., 2.61× and 3.64× larger improvements than PE,
respectively). This advantage comes from two factors: (i)
broader coverage of blocking threads, since SuperPass ac-
celerates multiple blocking threads such as rwsem readers
that PE does not cover; and (ii) faster acceleration, because
once a blocking thread is labeled, SuperPass grants it CPU
immediately via the scheduler fast track, whereas PE runs a
lock holder only when the blocked high-priority waiter is
scheduled, leaving additional runqueue delay. On Cuttlefish,
we observe fewer and shorter priority-inversion blockings
on the UI-thread for three reasons. (i) it lacks big.LITTLE
DVFS/thermal limits used in physical smartphones [11, 14],
(ii) it omits OEM/background services and sensor stacks [7],
and (iii) it uses a virtual display pipeline [17]. In conclusion,
SuperPass outperforms PE in reducing both the frequency
and duration of priority-inversion blockings on UI thread.
6.4
Overhead Analysis
Memory Overhead. We implement SuperPass in the An-
droid kernel with minimal modifications. We add a per-
thread flag in the struct task_struct to mark the block-
ing threads of the latency-critical threads (1 B) and a list
in each rwsem to track up to eight reader holders (8 ×
sizeof(void*) = 64B). Writers reuse the existing owner field,
so no extra space is added for writer holders.
CPU Overhead. At runtime, the lock-level detector for find-
ing blocking threads works only when the latency-critical
threads fail to obtain a lock. The detector performs 𝑂(1)
checks (latency-critical thread/label status and lock hold-
ers’ priority). On the lock side, each lock holder is inserted
into (and removed from) the end of the bounded list in 𝑂(1).
Overall, the measured system-wide CPU overhead is ≈0.74%
(details in the supplementary file).
7
Related Work
To the best of our knowledge, there is no previous work
targeting priority inversions of latency-critical threads on
Android. The existing solutions designed for real-time sys-
tems fail to address the problem on Android and may intro-
duce high overheads. To address this gap, we propose a new
solution for Android, SuperPass, which is inspired by two in-
sights: first, the long priority inversion blockings are driven
by the accumulated CPU waiting time of low-priority block-
ing threads on the scheduler runqueue. Second, on Android,
even latency-critical threads could be blocked by many con-
current readers, tracking a limited number of readers suffices
to achieve good responsiveness while maintaining low over-
head in most cases. We conduct comprehensive comparisons
with both the default solution in modern smartphones and
the state-of-the-art solutions. The remainder of this section
reviews related work on priority inversion mitigation and
lock-optimization-based potential solutions.
Priority Inversion Mitigation. Typical solutions in real-
time systems for priority inversion include Priority Inher-
itance (PI) and Priority Ceiling Protocol (PCP) [22, 26, 41].
The core idea of PI is temporarily raising a low-priority lock
holder to the blocked thread’s priority until the lock is re-
leased and propagating this boost transitively across chains
of blocking threads. We implement this core idea on rwsem
and compare it with our solution. One of PI’s variants is
PI for priority-ordered spin locks [44]. PI-based solutions
share a common limitation that they assume priority raising
leads to immediate CPU access, which does not hold under
Android’s CFS. The core idea of PCP is to assign each lock
a priority ceiling equal to the highest priority of any task
that may use it and to execute a task at this ceiling while it
holds the lock. PCP has several variants, including the Stack
Resource Policy (SRP) [16], the immediate priority ceiling
protocol [20], and multiprocessor extensions [21, 40]. PCP-
based solutions require prior knowledge of all potential lock
users and their priorities, which is impractical in dynamic
Android workloads.
Recently, Proxy Execution [9, 23, 24, 43] has been pro-
posed as a mechanism to accelerate lock holders by exe-
cuting them on behalf of blocked threads. We evaluate it
as a comparison mechanism. Its general form is allocation
inheritance [28], which generalizes priority inheritance by
transferring processor allocation or execution rights to the
lock holder. These approaches also aim to unblock waiters.
12
SuperPass differs by targeting Android shared-lock multi-
reader blocking and enabling immediate execution of block-
ing threads, rather than waiting for the high-priority thread’s
allocated CPU time.
Lock-Optimization-Based Potential Solutions. Reader-
writer lock designs have also been optimized to reduce con-
tention, improve fairness, or lower tail latency. Examples in-
clude phase-fair reader-writer locks [19], read-biased designs
such as BRAVO [25], and queue-management or shuffling-
based designs that optimize fairness and scalability [29, 30].
Read-optimized alternatives such as RCU further reduce read-
side blocking by changing the synchronization model [31,
37, 38]. These approaches are complementary to SuperPass.
They redesign the lock or synchronization primitive itself,
whereas SuperPass targets scheduler-induced runnable de-
lays on the blocking dependency chain in existing Android
shared locks. This distinction is important because Figure 6
shows that long priority-inversion blockings are dominated
by the runnable delay of blocking threads rather than lock
critical-section time. Therefore, lock redesign alone does
not directly address the main bottleneck we target, while
SuperPass can coexist with improved lock implementations.
8
Conclusion
In this work, we investigate the priority inversion of latency-
critical threads in Android systems. Using the foreground
UI thread as a representative case study, we find that it fre-
quently causes prolonged blocking durations and dropped
frames that degrade the user experience of mobile devices.
Existing solutions designed for real-time systems are inef-
fective and could introduce fairness issues. To address this
problem, we proposed SuperPass, a lightweight kernel mech-
anism that effectively reduces the blockings of the latency-
critical threads with safeguards to limit impact on fairness.
We evaluate SuperPass on a Google Pixel 8. The results show
that SuperPass significantly reduces the priority-inversion
blocking durations compared to both the default scheduler
and state-of-the-art approaches.
References
[1] 2023. kernel/locking/rwsem.c (comment on overhead of track-
ing readers). https://git.zx2c4.com/wireguard-linux/tree/kernel/
locking/rwsem.c. Source comment: “Ideally we would like to track
all the readers that own a rwsem, but the overhead is simply too
big. [Online; accessed 20-March-2026]”.
[2] 2024. Google Pixel 8. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pixel_8. [Online;
accessed 20-March-2026].
[3] 2024. SCHED_DEADLINE Linux Documentation. https://www.
kernel.org/doc/Documentation/scheduler/sched-deadline.txt. [On-
line; accessed 20-March-2026].
[4] 2024.
Slow rendering.
https://developer.android.com/topic/
performance/vitals/render. [Online; accessed 20-March-2026].
[5] 2024. UI jank detection. https://developer.android.com/studio/
profile/jank-detection. [Online; accessed 20-March-2026].
[6] 2025.
Android dumpsys.
https://developer.android.com/tools/
dumpsys. [Online; accessed 20-March-2026].
[7] 2025. Cuttlefish virtual Android devices. https://source.android.
com/docs/devices/cuttlefish. [Online; accessed 20-March-2026].
[8] 2025. Learn about rendering in game loops. https://developer.
android.com/games/develop/gameloops.
[Online; accessed 20-
March-2026].
[9] 2025. Proxy Execution Github. https://github.com/johnstultz-work/
linux-dev/tree/proxy-exec-v6-6.6.
[Online; accessed 20-March-
2026].
[10] 2025. SurfaceView and GLSurfaceView. https://source.android.
com/docs/core/graphics/arch-sv-glsv. [Online; accessed 20-March-
2026].
[11] 2025. Thermal mitivation. https://source.android.com/docs/core/
power/thermal-mitigation. [Online; accessed 20-March-2026].
[12] 2026. EEVDF Scheduler. The Linux Kernel Documentation. https:
//docs.kernel.org/scheduler/sched-eevdf.html [Online; accessed
20-March-2026].
[13] Luca Abeni and Giorgio Buttazzo. 1998. Integrating Multimedia
Applications in Hard Real-Time Systems. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Real-Time Systems Symposium (RTSS).
[14] ARM Ltd. 2013.
big.LITTLE Technology: The Future of Mobile.
Technical Report. ARM Whitepaper. https://developer.arm.com/-
/media/Files/pdf/white-paper/big-little-technology-the-future-
of-mobile.pdf
[15] O. Babaoglu, K. Marzullo, and F. Schneider. 1993. A Formalization
of Priority Inversion. Technical Report.
[16] T.P. Baker. 1990. A stack-based resource allocation policy for real-
time processes. In 1990 Proceedings 11th Real-Time Systems Sympo-
sium. 191–200.
[17] Alessio Balsini. 2020. Scheduling for the Android display pipeline.
https://lwn.net/Articles/809545/ [Online; accessed 20-March-2026].
[18] Justinien Bouron, Sebastien Chevalley, Baptiste Lepers, Willy
Zwaenepoel, Redha Gouicem, Julia Lawall, Gilles Muller, and Julien
Sopena. 2018. The Battle of the Schedulers: FreeBSD ULE vs. Linux
CFS. In 2018 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 18).
USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 85–96.
[19] Björn B. Brandenburg and James H. Anderson. 2010. Spin-based
reader-writer synchronization for multiprocessor real-time systems.
46, 1 (Sept. 2010), 25–87. doi:10.1007/s11241-010-9097-2
[20] Andreu Carminati, Rômulo Oliveira, Fernando Luís, and Friedrich.
2012. Implementation and Evaluation of the Synchronization Pro-
tocol Immediate Priority Ceiling in PREEMPT-RT Linux. Journal of
Software 7 (03 2012).
[21] Zewei Chen, Hang Lei, Maolin Yang, Yong Liao, and Lei Qiao. 2021.
A Hierarchical Hybrid Locking Protocol for Parallel Real-Time
Tasks. ACM Trans. Embed. Comput. Syst. 20, 5s, Article 86 (sep
2021), 22 pages.
[22] Albert MK Cheng and James Ras. 2007. The implementation of the
priority ceiling protocol in Ada-2005. ACM SIGAda Ada Letters 27,
1 (2007), 24–39.
[23] Jonathan Corbet. 2023. Addressing priority inversion with proxy
exettion. LWN.net.
https://lwn.net/Articles/934114/ [Online;
accessed 20-March-2026].
[24] Jonathan Corbet. 2023. What remains to be done for proxy execu-
tion. LWN.net. https://lwn.net/Articles/953438/ [Online; accessed
20-March-2026].
[25] Dave Dice and Alex Kogan. 2019. BRAVO—Biased Locking for
Reader-Writer Locks. In 2019 USENIX Annual Technical Conference
(USENIX ATC 19). USENIX Association, Renton, WA, 315–328.
[26] John B Goodenough and Lui Sha. 1988. The priority ceiling protocol:
A method for minimizing the blocking of high priority Ada tasks.
ACM SIGAda Ada Letters 8, 7 (1988), 20–31.
13
[27] Google. 2024. Mobile App Usage & Download Statistics. https:
//buildfire.com/app-statistics/. [Online; accessed 20-March-2026].
[28] P. Holman and J.H. Anderson. 2002.
Object sharing in Pfair-
scheduled multiprocessor systems. In Proceedings 14th Euromicro
Conference on Real-Time Systems. Euromicro RTS 2002. 111–120.
[29] Takashi Hoshino and Kenjiro Taura. 2025. Fairer and More Scalable
Reader-Writer Locks by Optimizing Queue Management. In Pro-
ceedings of the 30th ACM SIGPLAN Annual Symposium on Principles
and Practice of Parallel Programming (Las Vegas, NV, USA) (PPoPP
’25). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
115–127.
[30] Sanidhya Kashyap, Irina Calciu, Xiaohe Cheng, Changwoo Min,
and Taesoo Kim. 2019. Scalable and practical locking with shuffling.
In Proceedings of the 27th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles (Huntsville, Ontario, Canada) (SOSP ’19). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 586–599. doi:10.1145/
3341301.3359629
[31] Chan-Kyung Kim, Eu teum Choi, Mingyun Han, Seongjin Lee, and
Jaeho Kim. 2022. Performance Analysis of RCU-Style Non-Blocking
Synchronization Mechanisms on a Manycore-Based Operating Sys-
tem. Applied Sciences (2022).
[32] Yu Liang, Jinheng Li, Rachata Ausavarungnirun, Riwei Pan, Liang
Shi, Tei-Wei Kuo, and Chun Jason Xue. 2020. Acclaim: Adaptive
Memory Reclaim to Improve User Experience in Android Systems.
In 2020 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 20).
USENIX Association, 897–910.
[33] Giuseppe Lipari and Enrico Bini. 2003. A Framework for Hier-
archical Scheduling. In Proceedings of the IEEE Real-Time Systems
Symposium (RTSS).
[34] Shengzhong Liu, Shuochao Yao, Xinzhe Fu, Rohan Tabish, Simon
Yu, Ayoosh Bansal, Heechul Yun, Lui Sha, and Tarek Abdelzaher.
2020. On removing algorithmic priority inversion from mission-
critical machine inference pipelines. In 2020 IEEE Real-Time Systems
Symposium (RTSS). IEEE, 319–332.
[35] D. Locke, L. Sha, R. Rajikumar, J. Lehoczky, and G. Burns. 1988.
Priority inversion and its control: An experimental investigation.
In Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Real-Time
Ada Issues (Moretonhampstead, Devon, England) (IRTAW ’88). As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 39–42.
[36] Jean-Pierre Lozi, Baptiste Lepers, Justin Funston, Fabien Gaud,
Vivien Quéma, and Alexandra Fedorova. 2016. The Linux scheduler:
a decade of wasted cores. In Proceedings of the Eleventh European
Conference on Computer Systems (London, United Kingdom) (Eu-
roSys ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, Article 1, 16 pages.
[37] Paul E. McKenney. 2024. The RCU API, 2024 edition. LWN.net (Sept.
2024). https://lwn.net/Articles/988638/
[38] Paul E. McKenney, Joel Fernandes, Silas Boyd-Wickizer, and
Jonathan Walpole. 2020. RCU Usage In the Linux Kernel: Eigh-
teen Years Later. 54, 1 (Aug. 2020), 47–63.
[39] Sarvesh Pandey and Udai Shanker. 2020. Transaction scheduling
protocols for controlling priority inversion: A review. Computer
Science Review 35 (2020), 100215.
[40] R. Rajkumar. 1990. Real-time synchronization protocols for shared
memory multiprocessors. In Proceedings.,10th International Confer-
ence on Distributed Computing Systems. 116–123.
[41] L. Sha, R. Rajkumar, and J.P. Lehoczky. 1990. Priority inheritance
protocols: an approach to real-time synchronization. IEEE Trans.
Comput. 39, 9 (1990), 1175–1185.
[42] D. Silambarasan and M RamanathaVenkatesan. 2016. Handling
of Priority Inversion Problem in RT-Linux using Priority Ceiling
Protocol.
[43] John Stultz. 2023. [PATCH v3 00/14] Generalized Priority Inher-
itance and Proxy Execution. Linux Kernel Mailing List (LKML).
https://lkml.org/lkml/2023/4/11/17 [Online; accessed 20-March-
2026].
[44] Cai-Dong Wang, H. Takada, and K. Sakamura. 1996. Priority in-
heritance spin locks for multiprocessor real-time systems. In Pro-
ceedings Second International Symposium on Parallel Architectures,
Algorithms, and Networks (I-SPAN’96). 70–76.
14
