The Many Senses of Visual Similarity:
A Text-Prompted Image Perceptual Metric
Sheng-Yu Wang1
Yotam Nitzan2
Aaron Hertzmann2
Jun-Yan Zhu1
Eli Shechtman2 Alexei A. Efros3
Richard Zhang2
1Carnegie Mellon University
2Adobe Research
3UC Berkeley
Abstract
Human visual similarity judgments are context-dependent. For example, two im-
ages may be similar in shape but distinct in color. Existing perceptual similarity
metrics, however, collapse these nuances into a single scalar value, offering no
mechanism to condition on specific aspects. To bridge this gap, we introduce
a large-scale dataset of human similarity judgments over image triplets, where
each triplet is annotated across multiple, free-form semantic aspects of similarity.
Benchmarking a broad range of frontier vision-language models (VLMs) reveals a
considerable performance gap compared to human annotators’ concensus. Leverag-
ing our data, we fine-tune a VLM to produce our Text-Prompted Image Perceptual
Similarity (TPIPS) metric, capturing multiple senses of visual similarity depending
on the specified text prompt. We demonstrate that TPIPS aligns more closely with
human perception and generalizes reliably beyond the training distribution. Finally,
we show that TPIPS unlocks new capabilities in text-guided retrieval, composi-
tional search, and the fine-grained evaluation of generative models. Our code, data,
and trained models are at https://peterwang512.github.io/TPIPS.
1
Introduction
A long line of psychology research has established that human similarity judgments are context-
dependent [4, 5]. The same holds for images: there are many senses of visual similarity, depending
on which aspect (color, texture, illumination, semantics, style, etc) is being compared. Consider
Figure 1: given the reference cow statue image (left), it is not immediately obvious which of the
four candidate images on the right is the most similar overall to the reference. However, the answer
becomes clear if the similarity judgement is conditioned on a specific visual aspect, such as the cow’s
color, pose, or the image background.
The image processing and computer vision communities have spent decades making progress on
capturing human perceptual similarity, from hand-engineered distances like SSIM and others [1,
6, 7] to learned metrics trained on annotated human similarity judgments, such as LPIPS [2] or
DreamSim [3]. These methods, however, model similarity as a single, scalar quantity, without
conditioning on the aspect of the comparison. While previous methods add a notion of conditioning
by leveraging vision-language models [8, 9, 10], to our knowledge, no dataset collected with human
perceptual similarity judgments exists to serve as validation.
To fill this gap, we collect a large-scale dataset of one million human similarity judgments over 25K
image triplets. Following triplet-based protocols standard in perceptual similarity studies [2, 3, 11],
annotators provide relative perceptual judgements by comparing three images and indicating which
are most or least similar. Different from prior work, we extend this protocol to perceptual judgements
conditioned on various visual aspects. We collect 260K triplet-aspect condition combinations, where
each triplet is annotated conditioned on multiple free-form visual aspects, each aspect yielding a
separate set of similarity judgments. The triplets are generated using text-to-image models and
Preprint.
arXiv:2607.18237v1  [cs.CV]  20 Jul 2026
Which is more similar to the reference?
Reference Image
LPIPS [2], DreamSim [3]
SSIM [1]
L2
Prior Methods
(Unconditional Similarity)
Ours: Text-Prompted Image Perceptual Similarity (TPIPS)
subject color
cow statue pose
ground surface
flag pattern
(None selected)
Figure 1: The Many Senses of Similarity. Given a reference image (top left), the four candidate
images (top right) are similar to the reference in different ways, such as subject color, pose, ground
surface, or texture. But existing visual similarity measures (L2, SSIM [1], LPIPS [2], Dreamsim [3])
collapse similarity into a single scalar, and thus producing ambiguous and inconsistent results. Our
Text-Prompted Image Perceptual Similarity (TPIPS) can be conditioned on a particular sense of
similarity (aspect), prompt-able by free-form text. With conditioning, this visual similarity problem is
no longer ambiguous, and our method selects the most similar image aligned with human perceptual
judgements.
designed to be challenging. If the differences between candidates are too subtle, humans cannot
reliably judge similarity; if they are too coarse, the task collapses to judging overall similarity, which
current models already handle. We target the middle ground, with images that differ along multiple
aspects simultaneously — through fine-grained variations in properties such as color, lighting, and
texture.
We use this syntheic dataset to construct a benchmark and evaluate a broad set of baselines, including
recent open-source and proprietary VLMs [12, 13, 14, 15] and state-of-the-art multimodal embedding
models [16, 17], revealing room for improvement. We find that even the strongest current VLM
systems often do not agree with human similarity judgments on specified aspects. We carefully
propose and analyze different architecture choices for tuning a VLM into an aspect-conditioned
perceptual metric on our collected perceptual data. Our model, Text-Prompted Image Perceptual
Similarity (TPIPS), narrows the performance gap considerably. To assess whether our metric remains
reliable beyond the synthetic training distribution, we collect a second set of human similarity
judgments over outputs generated by external algorithms, designed for four different vision and
graphics tasks, spanning both generative and non-generative pipelines. Our model outperforms
baselines in this setting too, suggesting that it can serve as a general-purpose perceptual metric for
aspect-conditioned evaluation.
We show several downstream applications: evaluation of generative vision models, where output and
reference similarity is measured along specified visual axes, nearest-neighbor retrieval, where the
same query image returns different neighbors under different aspects, and compositional retrieval,
where multiple query images, each conditioned on a different visual aspect, can be combined to find
images that match the criteria. Our code, data, and trained models are at https://peterwang512.
github.io/TPIPS.
2
Related Works
Perceptual similarity and preferences. Comparing two images is a fundamental problem in vision,
with early approaches relying on hand-engineered, patch-based metrics [1, 6, 7]. With advances in
deep image recognition [18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23], learned deep features have been found to provide
a more useful similarity signal than hand-engineered descriptors [2, 24, 25, 26, 27]. LPIPS [2],
PieAPP [28], and DISTS [29] directly optimize deep features to align better with human judgments on
low-level distortions. DreamSim [3] learns human perceptual judgments on synthesized images with
high-level variations. Muttenthaler et al. [30] study perceptual judgments across object categories
2
with THINGS [11]. Other works improve metric robustness to spatial shifts [31], adversarial
perturbations [32], and arbitrary transformations [33]. Alternative metrics isolate specific attributes
like style [34, 35] or relationships between visual elements [36]. While these methods predict a
single similarity score, similarity is inherently multi-faceted [4]. We address this by introducing a
benchmark and model for human similarity judgements conditioned on various visual aspects. A
separate but adjacent line of work uses pairwise human comparisons over generated or edited images
to learn a scalar quality score over a single image [37, 38, 39, 40]. In contrast, we learn from triplet
judgments to model pairwise similarity conditioned on visual aspects.
Conditional representation. Various research has studied learning representations of an input
conditioned on different aspects. A line of work explores learning conditional representation given
an explicit aspect, but assumes a fixed, finite vocabulary of conditions [41, 42, 43, 44, 45]. More
recent work generalizes the condition input to free-form text, including training-free methods via
vision-language models [46, 47, 48] and training-based methods that curate conditional supervision.
GeneCIS [8] and FocalLens [9] mine attribute-difference triplets from existing vision-language
datasets, while Omni-Attribute [10] bootstraps supervision from VLM-generated labels and TF-
QARE [48] prompts for an image’s object, background, or style and averages the embedding of the
resulting description. A parallel line of work studies context-conditional categorization [49, 50], and
composed image retrieval [51, 52, 53, 54] takes image-text inputs but uses the text to specify how
the retrieved images should be different from the query image. Unlike prior conditional similarity
work, we collect human similarity judgments directly under each aspect condition. This captures
fine-grained relative differences not reliably present in image captions and VLM outputs, better
aligning our method with human judgments than prior training-free, training-based methods and
state-of-the-art VLMs.
Vision-language models. Early vision-language models targeted a small number of tasks: dual-
encoder contrastive models [22, 55, 56] such as CLIP [22] align image and text representations for
retrieval and classification, while encoder-decoder models such as BLIP [57, 58] added captioning
and visual question answering. Modern instruction-tuned multimodal models including Qwen-VL
series [59, 60, 14, 61] and others [62, 63, 15, 64], and frontier proprietary systems such as Gemini [13]
and GPT [12]—are trained on a much broader task mixtures [63, 60, 15] that, in some cases, also
includes similarity benchmarks such as NIGHTS [3] and GeneCIS [8]. A parallel line of universal
multimodal embedders, such as VLM2Vec [16, 65] and Qwen3-VL-Embedding [17], repurposes
these backbones for instruction-conditioned retrieval. While VLMs can solve various vision tasks,
we find that the performance gap remains for VLMs to yield human-aligned pairwise similarity
judgments conditioned on specified aspects. Our benchmark and models aid in closing this gap.
3
Dataset collection
Our goal is to collect a dataset of similarity judgments D, such that they can be used to train and
evaluate a text-conditioned similarity algorithm. Human perceptual similarity is inherently relative:
given a small set of candidates (e.g., 3 images), people can reliably identify the most different item,
or the closer pair, with respect to visual aspects such as lighting, object pose, or background [4]. To
do so, as shown in Figure 2, we collect two datasets: (1) a large, synthetic dataset on odd-one-out
judgments, which we use for training, and (2) a smaller set on other vision and graphics algorithms to
validate the generalization of our algorithm on real-world applications.
3.1
Odd-one-out dataset
Given a pair of images, humans cannot reliably provide a similarity score directly, which led previous
works to collect relative comparisons from image triplets by asking which of two image variations
is closer to a given reference [2, 3], or which image is the most different [11]. In this setting, we
adopt the odd-one-out task [11], and extend it to perceptual judgements conditioned on various visual
aspects. That is, given a triplet, X = {x1, x2, x3}, we ask annotators to the pick one that looks most
different under the text guidance c, recording it the result as y. Next, we describe our procedure for
generating the triplet X and text conditionings c.
Triplet generation. To construct our dataset, we curate a diverse yet controlled set of image variations.
A core challenge lies in identifying an optimal difficulty regime: triplets must be neither trivial,
where differences are too vast, nor uninformative, where differences are negligible. Furthermore,
3
Image 0
Image 1
Image 2
Reference
A
B
camera distance, flower color palette, lighting 
warmth, tablecloth pattern, teapot handle direction…
scene subject depiction, backyard garden setting,
gray stone patio slabs, wooden fence background, green lawn foreground...
(a) Text-to-Image Triplets (Odd-One-Out)
(b) Other vision algorithms (2AFC)
Select the image where <aspect> 
looks MOST DIFFERENT
Select image (A or B) where <aspect>
looks MOST SIMILAR to the reference image
Algorithm outputs
Triplet Variations
Synthetic 
images
Image
Editing
Image 
Compositing
Image-to-3D
Input Image
Edited Image
FG or BG Image
Composite
GT View
Rendered View
Input Image
Rendered View
Novel View 
Synthesis
Ref:
A/B:
Text-to-Image
Figure 2: Datasets. (left) We ask users which image within the triplet is the odd-one-out (OOO).
The images are synthetically generated using variations of text-to-image models, using it to train our
text-conditioned similarity model. (right) We test the generalization using outputs of algorithms on
different vision and graphics tasks. We ask users which is more similar to a reference image, between
two algorithm outputs, in a two-alternative forced choice (2AFC) setup.
Table 1: Dataset statistics. We report the number of image triplets, triplet-aspect combinations, and
total human votes. Each triplet-aspect combination receives 5 votes; annotators may also select “can’t
tell,” in which case that vote is dropped. To also capture overall similarity, “overall” is included as
one of the aspects in the odd-one-out dataset for both training and evaluation, whereas the 2AFC
evaluation is aspect-conditioned only. See Appendix A for further details.
(a) Odd-one-out dataset.
Split
Triplet
Triplet-Aspect
Human vote
Train
22,157
234,662
938,960
Validation
185
1,947
7,496
Test
2,000
20,782
98,039
Total
24,342
257,391
1,044,495
(b) 2AFC out-of-distribution set.
Source
Triplet
Triplet-Aspect
Human Vote
Img edit
256
1,633
4,838
Img composite
294
839
2,947
NVS
180
650
2,444
Im-to-3D
397
1,649
6,020
Total
1,127
4,771
16,249
images within a single triplet must exhibit variation across multiple independent text-conditioned
aspects to necessitate multi-faceted reasoning. Randomly sampling from large-scale image datasets or
subsampling a video dataset typically yields degenerate triplets, where one image is an outlier across
all aspects or the visual distance between the images is too great to allow for meaningful comparison.
Inspired by Fu et al. [3], we leverage text-to-image (T2I), language (LLM), and vision-language
(VLM) models to propose candidate triplets and text conditionings at scale. We generate candidate
triplets by sampling prompts from FLUX-Reason-6M [66]. A straightforward approach is to sample
images from the same prompt, but this often fails to produce sufficiently diverse variations. As
such, we use a language model to generate variations of a given prompt, before rendering the triplet.
This produces a controlled yet diverse candidate set, while allowing humans to judge which of the
text-induced variations are actually reflected in the images.
Text guidance proposal and refinement. For each generated triplet, we first construct a candidate
set of prompts. During prompt-variation generation, we also prompt an LLM to identify the aspects
of the images that are intended to change. If the images were fully described by the input text
prompts, this would be sufficient. However, as the mapping between prompts and images is not
one-to-one, images may vary from the prompt, or show additional unspecified properties. As such,
4
we pass the triplet and the candidate list to a VLM for refinement, removing unrelated ones and
adding visually-varying factors that are not explicit in the prompts (e.g., pose or object size).
The resulting aspect list is intentionally over-complete, and it is not guaranteed to be aligned with
how humans describe (or attend to) differences in the triplet. We therefore treat these as proposals
and prune. For each triplet, we ask 5 annotators for judgments. We provide an additional “can’t
tell” option, and if marked by 3 or more users, we remove the attribute from the list. From the
remaining triplets we remove the “can’t tell” votes and normalize to get probability distribution
y = (y1, y2, y3) ∈∆3. We also ask for overall similarity, recorded under the “overall” condition.
Our final dataset is D = {(X(n), c(n), y(n))}n, where each datapoint is a tuple of image triplet
X(n) = {x(n)
1 , x(n)
2 , x(n)
3 }, aspect condition c(n), and human vote distribution y(n). We divide the
dataset into train, validation, and test datasets, as summarized in Table 1.
3.2
Out-of-distribution 2AFC dataset
To test generalization to different image variations and content, we curate an additional out-of-
distribution evaluation set from the outputs of other computer vision algorithms. This choice is
motivated by a practical use case of our framework—evaluating and comparing vision systems—and
by the fact that algorithm outputs provide structured, perceptually meaningful variations.
Unlike our main dataset, this setting is inherently reference-based: each query comes with a reference
image (either the algorithm input or the ground-truth target) and multiple candidate outputs. We
therefore adopt a 2-alternative-forced-choice (2AFC) protocol: given an aspect c, annotators are
shown the reference xref and two randomly sampled outputs (x0, x1), and select which output is
more similar to the reference under c, with multiple votes across annotators averaged as y ∈[0, 1].
Similar to the odd-one-out dataset, we collect votes across 5 annotators and remove those with ≥3
“can’t tell” votes. We also remove datapoints that have a tie, as they are not useful for evaluation.
This produces an evaluation dataset Dext = {(xref, x0, x1, c, y)}. The external algorithms and
domains used in this out-of-distribution set differ from the training data; an overview of dataset
statistics is in Table 1. Additional details are in Appendix A.
4
Learning Text-Guided Perceptual Similarity
4.1
Objective
We learn text-prompted similarity fθ(x1, x2 | c) to be consistent with the annotators’ choices in the
odd-one-out dataset D. We show the objective in Figure 3. Suppose that for a triplet, all annotators
selected xk to be the odd-one-out. This implies that the similarity between the other two images,
fθ(xi, xj | c), where {i, j} = {1, 2, 3} \ {k}, should be the most similar to each other than any pair
involving xk. Formally, we wish fθ to have the following property:
fθ(xi, xj | c) > fθ(xk, xl | c) ∀l ∈{i, j}.
(1)
To encourage this behavior, we follow the softmax choice model used in prior triplet odd-one-out
embeddings [30]. Defining ¯sk = sij = fθ(xi, xj | c) and temperature τ > 0, we model the predicted
likelihood of k being chosen, comparing it to the human vote y with a standard cross-entropy loss.
ˆyk = pθ(k | X, c) =
exp
 ¯sk/τ

P3
m=1 exp
 ¯sm/τ
,
L(θ) = −E(X, c, y)∼D
"
3
X
k=1
yk log ˆyk
#
.
(2)
4.2
Architecture
Vision-language models (VLMs) are a natural starting point, as one can prompt a VLM to judge the
similarity of two images along a given text condition. However, we find a substantial gap between
current VLMs’ zero-shot judgments and human perceptual choices (Section 5), motivating task-
specific fine-tuning. As shown in Figure 3 (right), we explore three architectures that differ in how
5
𝑓!
𝑥!
𝑥"
𝑥#
Text-conditioned
pairwise similarity
𝑠!"
𝑠!#
𝑠"#
Which image is most
different in lighting?
𝑦$
Cross-
Entropy
Predicted
odd-one-out
𝜏
Softmax
𝑓!
𝑓!
VLM
VLM
(a) Late fusion (Embedding)
𝑥"
𝑥!
“lighting”
“lighting”
Cos
𝑐
𝑐
𝑓!
= 𝑓$(𝑠", 𝑠#|𝑐)
Human
judgements
𝑦
Learning Similarity from Odd-one-out Data
(b) Mid-fusion
(Activation Difference) 
VLM
VLM
𝑥"
𝑥!
“lighting”
“lighting”
Avg activation Δ
𝑐
𝑐
𝑓!
𝑠!"
(c) Early fusion
𝑥"
𝑥!
“lighting”
𝑐
𝑓!
𝑟"
𝑟!
Cos
VLM
𝑠!"
𝑠!"
Figure 3: (left) Learning similarity from odd-one-out data. Users judge which image is the
odd-one-out of the triplet, on a given condition (x1 in this case). We predict the text-conditioned
pairwise similarity between all pairs in the triplet using fθ. Intuitively, the similarity between the
non-chosen images, shown as s23 should be the greatest. The odd-one-out is predicted with a softmax
(with temperature τ) on the similarities, with the embeddings trained with a cross-entropy loss. (right)
Architecture choices for fθ: (a) Late fusion embeds the images separately and only compares the
final activation; (b) Mid-fusion uses internal feature activations between separately-embedded images;
(c) Early fusion embeds both images into the VLM directly.
early the two images interact in the network, ranging from no interaction (late fusion) to full joint
attention (early fusion). All three are trained end-to-end with our loss (Equation 2).
Late fusion (embeddings). We repurpose the VLM as a text-guided embedding model, following
recent work on instruction-tuned VLM retrievers [67, 68]. Given an image x and an aspect c, we
form the prompt “Represent the similarity of the image based on <c> ” and feed it together with x into
the VLM, taking the final, normalized hidden state of the last token as the embedding z = bgθ(x, c).
Pairwise similarity is then the cosine of the two embeddings: fθ(x1, x2 | c) = bgθ(x1, c)⊤bgθ(x2, c).
This is efficient at inference time, as embeddings can be precomputed and cached. As the two images
never interact within the network, the model must commit to a text-guided summary independently.
Mid fusion (activation distances). Following LPIPS [2], we can instead compare internal activations
of the VLM from the LLM decoder layers. We feed the image-prompt pair into the VLM, and for
each of L selected transformer layers, extract image tokens with token length T, unit-normalize
them along the channel dimension d to obtain a per-layer feature ϕℓ(x, c) ∈RT ×d. The similarity
is defined as the negative weighted ℓ2 distance between the per-layer features of the two images,
averaged across image tokens, and summed over layers:
fθ(x1, x2 | c) = −
L
X
ℓ=1
1
T
T
X
t=1
wℓ(c) ⊙
 ϕℓ(x1, c)t −ϕℓ(x2, c)t
2
2.
(3)
Unlike LPIPS, which tunes a fixed set of channel weights on top of a frozen backbone, our channel
weights wℓ(c) ∈Rd are text-conditioned per-channel weights per layer, parameterized by an MLP
that takes in the averaged text token embedding in the same layer. We additionally fine-tune the VLM
itself with LoRA [69] adapters. Like late fusion, this architecture treats each image independently
and fuses only at the comparison stage. Appendix B.2 analyzes these design changes in more detail.
Early fusion lets the two images interact throughout the network. Both images and prompt “Measure
the similarity between the two images based on <c> ” are packed into a single input sequence,
[ c tokens ∥x1 patches ∥x2 patches ∥r1 ∥r2 ],
so that every patch of x1 can attend to every patch of x2 at every layer, enabling direct patch-level
correspondence. The two learnable register tokens r1, r2 act as text-conditioned readouts for the two
images. Their final hidden states h1, h2 yields the similarity score: fθ(x1, x2 | c) =
h⊤
1 h2
∥h1∥∥h2∥.
6
(a) Odd-one-out Perceptual Judgement
Image 1
Image 2
Image 3
Reference
A
B
3D shape
Surface texture
Color tone
Camera pose
(b) 2AFC Perceptual Judgement
Gemini-3.1-Pro
GPT-5.4
Qwen3-VL-Embedding-8B
Ours
Human
Street surface 
reflection
Lighting 
warmth
Background skyline 
prominence
Car hood 
position
𝑥!
𝑥"
𝑥#
Figure 4: Do humans agree with the model’s choice? We compare aspect-conditioned similarity
among VLMs, our model, and humans, denoted by different dot colors and patterns. (Left) Odd-one-
out: the dot location indicates each method’s selection of the most different image for the aspect.
(Right) 2AFC: the dot location indicates the image is selected as more similar to the reference. Note
that our method (black) agrees with the human judgment, whereas VLMs often do not.
Importantly, by using careful design of the attention mask and positional encoding (please see
Appendix C.2), we satisfy two desirable properties by construction, without any auxiliary loss:
symmetry, fθ(x1, x2 | c) = fθ(x2, x1 | c), and identity, fθ(x, x | c) = 1 for any x. We detail the
hyperparameter, training procedure, prompts, and backbones in Appendix C.
5
Experiments
We evaluate on the odd-one-out and out-of-distribution 2AFC test sets. Our dataset improves VLMs
on other perceptual similarity benchmarks. We discuss applications of our methods, such as aspect-
conditioned retrieval and compositional retrieval, and show qualitative examples.
Metrics. For each aspect in a triplet, we report models’ agreement with humans [2], measuring how
often a random rater agrees with the model’s top choice. For an odd-one-out triplet with human vote
distribution y = (y1, y2, y3) and model prediction ˆk = arg maxk ˆyk, agreement is yˆk–the probability
humans vote the same as model prediction. Averaging all aspect conditions over the test set gives the
expected rater–model agreement. The 2AFC analogue is defined identically over two choices.
To contextualize absolute agreement numbers, we compute human consensus. It is defined as
y2
1 + y2
2 + y2
3, the expected agreement within raters for each aspect condition, averaged over the
test set. This human consensus reflects the best achievable agreement; we report it alongside all
agreement numbers. Likewise, the 2AFC analogue is defined identically over two choices.
Baselines are organized below:
• Classic: LPIPS [2], DreamSim [3]. Apply same similarity score regardless of the queried aspect.
• Late fusion (embeddings): text-image embedding models including text-conditioned encoders
(SteerViT [70])), late mixing of text and image embeddings (GeneCIS [8]), VLM-finetuned
embedding models (VLM2Vec-2.0 [65], Qwen3-VL-Embedding [17]), and proprietary models
(Gemini-2-Embedding [13]).
• Early fusion: VLMs including open-weight models (Qwen3-VL [14], InternVL3.5 [71], and
LLaVA-OneVision [63]) and proprietary models (GPT-5.4 and Gemini 3.1 Pro). Each model is
given both images and the text prompt and asked to return a scalar value within [0, 10].
• Mid-fusion (activation difference): we find that Qwen3-VL series is the best performing open-
weight backbone in both late and early fusion, and focus on this family for the mid-fusion analysis.
More implementation details of the baselines are in Appendix C.3.
We present our main results in Figure 5. On our odd-one-out task, a substantial gap exists between
the human consensus (67.5%, with 33.3% chance) and baseline model predictions across both
7
Chance
LPIPS
DreamSim
GPT-5.4
Gemini-3.1-Pro
InternVL3.5 8B
LLAVA-OV 7B
Qwen3-VL 8B
Ours
Qwen3-VL-Emb 8B
Ours
Gemini-2-Embedding
VLM2Vec v2.0
SteerViT
GeneCIS
Qwen3-VL-Emb 8B
Ours
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Model human agreement rate
Odd-One-Out (in distribution)
33.3
46.2
50.5
55.5
58.4
53.5
44.5
54.5
64.7
44.0
63.8
54.1
53.0
51.4
44.9
58.3
64.1
  Human Consensus: 67.5%  
Classic
Early Fusion
Mid Fusion
Late Fusion
Chance
LPIPS
DreamSim
GPT-5.4
Gemini-3.1-Pro
InternVL3.5 8B
LLAVA-OV 7B
Qwen3-VL 8B
Ours
Qwen3-VL-Emb 8B
Ours
Gemini-2-Embedding
VLM2Vec v2.0
SteerViT
GeneCIS
Qwen3-VL-Emb 8B
Ours
2AFC (out-of-distribution)
50.0
69.5
72.9
73.7
70.7
64.2
65.2
59.2
79.3
71.9
75.9
71.2
70.8
74.0
72.2
73.5
77.9
  Human Consensus: 89.3%  
Classic
Early Fusion
Mid Fusion
Late Fusion
Figure 5: How well do models agree with human perceptual judgement? We report model-human
agreement rate across recent vision language models and text-image embedding methods, categorized
as classic, early fusion, mid fusion, and late fusion. On the left, we show results on our synthetic
dataset D. On the right, we show our held-out distribution Dext. Error bar denotes 2-standard error.
We find that our method (red bars) consistently outperforms baselines in both in-domain odd-one-out
tests and out-of-domain 2AFC tests. Our early fusion model has a marginally better model-human-
agreement than the other two variants. The dotted line denotes the human-human agreement rate,
serving as the performance ceiling. Extended comparisons are detailed in Table 3.
Sim to Frame 0
(Ref) 0
32
64
96
128
Figure 6: Video example. Similarity between video frames to the initial frame. While the overall
similarity is dominated by the main factors (camera angle, as well as sunshine), the metric can be
steered to different attributes, such as the cup handle position.
tasks. LPIPS (46.2%) and DreamSim (50.5%) are aspect-agnostic, and merely providing an overall
similarity judgement is not sufficient. Among baselines, Gemini-3.1-Pro achieves the highest model-
human agreement on the odd-one-out task at 58.4%. Among open-weight models, the embedding-
based Qwen3-VL-Embed performs best on both tasks, and we therefore adopt it as the backbone
for our approach. Fine-tuning on our data substantially narrows the gap to the human consensus,
reducing it from 9.1% to 2.8% on the odd-one-out task. Notably, these gains translate to the held-out
2AFC distribution, reducing error from 15.8% to 10.0%, above baselines. The larger gap leaves more
room for improvement relative to the in-domain odd-one-out test set. Figure 4 shows qualitative
examples.
Early, mid, and late-fusion. Among the baseline models, no single fusion strategy consistently
dominates. The comparisons are not direct as they are trained with various settings. Mid-fusion
performs relatively poorly for off-the-shelf baselines, as such models are not designed to produce
informative mid-level features directly. In the controlled setting where we fine-tune all model types
under the same base model, early fusion consistently outperforms both middle and late fusion, albeit
by a modest margin. This suggests that allowing the model to interact with both images from the
earliest layers is beneficial for perceptual similarity judgements. On the other hand, the late fusion
model achieves similar performance but enables efficient retrieval by precomputing embeddings. We
will present our results mainly with the late fusion model unless specified. We analyze the effect of
dataset scale and model size in more detail in Appendix B.2.
8
Camera Viewpoint
Query
TPIPS (Ours)
Qwen3-VL-Embed
Object Color
Background
Composition
Season
Background
Retrieved Images (Similar Aspect, Different Overall)
Figure 7: Aspect-conditioned Image Retrieval. Given a query on the left, our method retrieves
images with respect to different visual aspects. Each row represents an aspect. Compared to the base
model (Qwen-VL-8B-Embedding), our fine-tuned late-fusion model consistently retrieves images
that better match the specified aspects. To encourage retrieval diversity, we adjust the ranking score
by subtracting a fraction of the overall similarity from the aspect similarity. We also include retrieval
results without this adjustment in Appendix B.1.
Composited query
Retrieved images
Brushwork
Color Palette
Subject Matter
Lighting Warmth
Background
Object Viewpoint
Figure 8: Compositional retrieval. Each query is specified with different aspects, and we directly
sum up similarity scores from two queries to rank the data. For example, combining (1) the painting
of two sitting people conditioned on subject matter and (2) Monet’s painting conditioned on brush
work yields Impressionist paintings of two sitting people. When we swap out the second query to be
color-palette specific, we can retrieve portraits of two people in the same pink and blue color tone.
9
Qualitative video example. In Fig 6, we show a synthesized video of a camera rotating around a
teacup, and calculate our metric from each frame to the initial frame. The main factors that vary is the
“camera angle”, as well as “sunshine” that appears in the middle of the video. As such, the “overall”
similarity mirrors these two main factors. However, the metric can be prompted to completely
different factors. The “number of cups” stays nearly constant, while “number of spoons” drops when
the spoon disappears behind the cup. More dramatically, prompting for the “cup handle position”
causes a large perturbation, as the handle moves from the right to left side.
Aspect-conditioned retrieval. Figure 7 illustrates how our method can retrieve perceptually similar
images under different aspect conditions given the same query. We index the OpenImages [72]
training set (1.7M images) and retrieve nearest neighbors conditioned on each aspect independently.
We encourage the retrieval for each aspect to have more different-looking images by adjusting the
similarity score to fθ(x1, x2 | caspect) −0.3 ∗fθ(x1, x2 | coverall), where caspect and coverall represent
aspect and overall condition, respectively. The results clearly demonstrate that perceptual similarity
is context-dependent. The same query yields meaningfully different nearest neighbors depending on
the aspect condition. We provide retrieval results without the similarity adjustments in Appendix B.1.
Compositional retrieval. Our method supports compositional queries by linearly combining sim-
ilarity scores across multiple queries conditioned on different aspect conditions. We validate this
on OpenImages again, and we also show results on the WikiArt dataset [73] (800K images), where
aspects such as subject matter, brushwork, and color palette capture independently meaningful dimen-
sions of visual similarity. As shown in Figure 8, composing queries across different aspects produces
retrievals that jointly satisfy all specified conditions, and swapping a single query component leads to
interpretably different results. We provide more qualitative results in Appendix B.1.
6
Discussion, Broader Impacts, and Limitations
Beyond using our metric as a human-grained, aspect-conditioned judge, it can serve as a feedback
signal to improve them, as recent work has leveraged VLM feedback to train image editing [74, 75]
and generation [37, 76] models. Our method can also aid in interpretability systems that automatically
discover and characterize neural features [77, 78]. Our metric offers human-aligned measurements
to assess which fine-grained visual properties the discovered features encode. As generative and
perceptual vision systems see broader deployment, interpretability becomes essential for public
oversight, accountability, and informed regulation.
Our VLM-based metric is substantially more expensive to compute than LPIPS or DreamSim. Also,
our current embedding-based retrieval requires separate feature encoding and indexing for each
aspect condition. In addition, our annotator pool is not representative of all viewers; perception
varies across people, and our metric inherits that bias. Our method is also limited by training data
diversity. We source prompts from FLUX-Reason-6M [66], which has more aesthetically curated
images. Our aspect proposals are VLM-generated, and we can systematically miss aspects that VLMs
cannot capture. Since our triplets often share similar semantic content, our learned metric is not fully
disentangled from the original content (e.g., sunny beach images will have higher weather similarity
scores on other similar sunny beach images than sunny forest images). Data-related issues could be
addressed with more diverse image sources and human-annotated aspects in future work. That said,
as VLMs continue to improve, our pipeline naturally benefits — and we view our human perceptual
data as a complementary signal toward building more human-aligned models, offering a new angle
for collecting fine-grained human perceptual judgments.
Acknowledgments. We thank Nupur Kumari, Kangle Deng, and Antonio Torralba for helpful
discussions and feedback on drafts. Sheng-Yu Wang is supported by the Google PhD Fellowship. The
project was partly supported by Adobe Inc., the Packard Fellowship, the Institute of Information &
Communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korean government
(MSIT) (No. RS-2024-00457882, National AI Research Lab Project), NSF IIS-2239076, NSF
ISS-2403303, and NSF IIS-2403305.
References
[1] Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: from
error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 13(4):600–612, 2004.
10
[2] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 586–595, 2018.
[3] Stephanie Fu, Netanel Y Tamir, Shobhita Sundaram, Lucy Chai, Richard Zhang, Tali Dekel, and Phillip
Isola. DreamSim: Learning new dimensions of human visual similarity using synthetic data. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
[4] Amos Tversky. Features of similarity. Psychological Review, 84(4):327–352, 1977.
[5] Douglas L Medin, Robert L Goldstone, and Dedre Gentner. Respects for similarity. Psychological Review,
100(2):254–278, 1993.
[6] Lin Zhang, Lei Zhang, Xuanqin Mou, and David Zhang. FSIM: A feature similarity index for image
quality assessment. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 20(8):2378–2386, 2011.
[7] Rafat Mantiuk, Kil Joong Kim, Allan G Rempel, and Wolfgang Heidrich. HDR-VDP-2: A calibrated
visual metric for visibility and quality predictions in all luminance conditions. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH), 30(4):40:1–40:14, 2011.
[8] Sagar Vaze, Nicolas Carion, and Ishan Misra. GeneCIS: A benchmark for general conditional image
similarity. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 6862–6872, 2023.
[9] Cheng-Yu Hsieh, Pavan Kumar Anasosalu Vasu, Fartash Faghri, Raviteja Vemulapalli, Chun-Liang Li,
Ranjay Krishna, Oncel Tuzel, and Hadi Pouransari. Focallens: Instruction tuning enables zero-shot
conditional image representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.08368, 2025.
[10] Tsai-Shien Chen, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Guocheng Gordon Qian, Kuan-Chieh Jackson Wang, Egor
Nemchinov, Moayed Haji-Ali, Riza Alp Guler, Willi Menapace, Ivan Skorokhodov, Anil Kag, et al.
Omni-attribute: Open-vocabulary attribute encoder for visual concept personalization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2512.10955, 2025.
[11] Martin N Hebart, Adam H Dickter, Alexis Kidder, Wan Y Kwok, Anna Corriveau, Caitlin Van Wicklin,
and Chris I Baker. THINGS: A database of 1,854 object concepts and more than 26,000 naturalistic
object images. PLOS ONE, 14(10):e0223792, 2019.
[12] OpenAI. GPT-4V(ision) system card. OpenAI Technical Report, 2023.
[13] Gemini Team, Google.
Gemini: A family of highly capable multimodal models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
[14] Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Ruizhe Chen, Keqin Chen, Xionghui Chen, Zesen Cheng, Lianghao Deng, Wei
Ding, Chang Gao, Chunjiang Ge, et al. Qwen3-vl technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21631,
2025.
[15] Zhe Chen, Jiannan Wu, Wenhai Wang, Weijie Su, Guo Chen, Sen Xing, Muyan Zhong, Qinglong Zhang,
Xizhou Zhu, Lewei Lu, et al. Internvl: Scaling up vision foundation models and aligning for generic
visual-linguistic tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 24185–24198, 2024.
[16] Ziyan Jiang, Rui Meng, Xinyi Yang, Semih Yavuz, Yingbo Zhou, and Wenhu Chen. VLM2Vec: Training
vision-language models for massive multimodal embedding tasks. In International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025.
[17] Mingxin Li, Yanzhao Zhang, Dingkun Long, Keqin Chen, Sibo Song, Shuai Bai, Zhibo Yang, Pengjun
Xie, An Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. Qwen3-VL-Embedding and Qwen3-VL-
Reranker: A unified framework for state-of-the-art multimodal retrieval and ranking. arXiv preprint,
2026.
[18] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. ImageNet classification with deep convolutional
neural networks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2012.
[19] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image
recognition. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
[20] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages
770–778, 2016.
[21] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas
Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit,
and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021.
11
[22] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish
Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from
natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pages 8748–8763. PmLR,
2021.
[23] Maxime Oquab, Timothée Darcet, Théo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre
Fernandez, Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, Mahmoud Assran, Nicolas Ballas,
Wojciech Galuba, Russell Howes, Po-Yao Huang, Shang-Wen Li, Ishan Misra, Michael Rabbat, Vasu
Sharma, Gabriel Synnaeve, Hu Xu, Hervé Jégou, Julien Mairal, Patrick Labatut, Armand Joulin, and Piotr
Bojanowski. DINOv2: Learning robust visual features without supervision. Transactions on Machine
Learning Research (TMLR), 2024.
[24] Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei. Perceptual losses for real-time style transfer and
super-resolution. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 694–711. Springer, 2016.
[25] Leon A Gatys, Alexander S Ecker, and Matthias Bethge. Image style transfer using convolutional neural
networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pages 2414–2423, 2016.
[26] Dan Amir and Yair Weiss. Understanding and simplifying perceptual distances. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 12226–12235, 2021.
[27] Kyle Sargent, Ruiqi Gao, Philipp Henzler, Charles Herrmann, Aleksander Holynski, Li Fei-Fei, Jiajun
Wu, and Jason Y Zhang. Vlic: Vision-language models as perceptual judges for human-aligned image
compression. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2026.
[28] Ekta Prashnani, Hong Cai, Yasamin Mostofi, and Pradeep Sen. PieAPP: Perceptual image-error assess-
ment through pairwise preference. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 1808–1817, 2018.
[29] Keyan Ding, Kede Ma, Shiqi Wang, and Eero P Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: Unifying structure
and texture similarity. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI),
44(5):2567–2581, 2020.
[30] Lukas Muttenthaler, Jonas Dippel, Lorenz Linhardt, Robert A Vandermeulen, and Simon Kornblith.
Human alignment of neural network representations. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations (ICLR), 2023.
[31] Abhijay Ghildyal and Feng Liu. Shift-tolerant perceptual similarity metric. In European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 91–107. Springer, 2022.
[32] Sara Ghazanfari, Alexandre Araujo, Prashanth Krishnamurthy, Farshad Khorrami, and Siddharth Garg.
LipSim: A provably robust perceptual similarity metric. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2024.
[33] Markus Kettunen, Erik Härkönen, and Jaakko Lehtinen. E-LPIPS: Robust perceptual image similarity via
random transformation ensembles. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.03973, 2019.
[34] Elena Garces, Aseem Agarwala, Diego Gutierrez, and Aaron Hertzmann. A similarity measure for
illustration style. 2014.
[35] Gowthami Somepalli, Anubhav Gupta, Kamal Gupta, Shramay Palta, Micah Goldblum, Jonas Geiping,
Abhinav Shrivastava, and Tom Goldstein. Measuring style similarity in diffusion models. In European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2024.
[36] Thao Nguyen, Sicheng Mo, Krishna Kumar Singh, Yilin Wang, Jing Shi, Nicholas Kolkin, Eli Shechtman,
Yong Jae Lee, and Yuheng Li. Relational visual similarity. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2026.
[37] Jiazheng Xu, Xiao Liu, Yuchen Wu, Yuxuan Tong, Qinkai Li, Ming Ding, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong.
ImageReward: Learning and evaluating human preferences for text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.05977, 2023.
[38] Yuval Kirstain, Adam Polyak, Uriel Singer, Shahbuland Matiana, Joe Penna, and Omer Levy. Pick-a-pic:
An open dataset of user preferences for text-to-image generation. In Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
[39] Xiaoshi Wu, Yiming Hao, Keqiang Sun, Yixiong Chen, Feng Zhu, Rui Zhao, and Hongsheng Li. Human
preference score v2: A solid benchmark for evaluating human preferences of text-to-image synthesis.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09341, 2023.
[40] Keming Wu, Sicong Jiang, Max Ku, Ping Nie, Minghao Liu, and Wenhu Chen. Editreward: A human-
aligned reward model for instruction-guided image editing. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2026.
12
[41] Ehsan Amid and Antti Ukkonen. Multiview triplet embedding: Learning attributes in multiple maps. In
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pages 1472–1480. PMLR, 2015.
[42] Andreas Veit, Serge Belongie, and Theofanis Karaletsos. Conditional similarity networks. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 830–838, 2017.
[43] Mariya I Vasileva, Bryan A Plummer, Krishna Dusad, Shreya Rajpal, Ranjitha Kumar, and David Forsyth.
Learning type-aware embeddings for fashion compatibility. In European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV), pages 390–405, 2018.
[44] William Thong, Cees GM Snoek, and Arnold WM Smeulders. Cooperative embeddings for instance,
attribute and category retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.01421, 2019.
[45] Reuben Tan, Mariya I Vasileva, Kate Saenko, and Bryan A Plummer. Learning similarity conditions
without explicit supervision. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV), pages 10373–10382, 2019.
[46] Masayuki Kawarada, Kosuke Yamada, Antonio Tejero-de Pablos, and Naoto Inoue. Training-free
conditional image embedding framework leveraging large vision language models. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pages 7636–7646, 2026.
[47] Siting Li, Xiang Gao, and Simon Shaolei Du. Highlighting what matters: Promptable embeddings for
attribute-focused image retrieval. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
2025.
[48] Yibing Wei, Sudeep Katakol, Manuel Brack, Jinhong Lin, Haoyue Bai, Yu-Teng Li, Richard Zhang, Eli
Shechtman, Hareesh Ravi, and Ajinkya Kale. Towards text-guided attribute-disentangled multimodal
representation learning. In CVPR, 2026.
[49] Zilin Wang, Sangwoo Mo, Stella X Yu, Sima Behpour, and Liu Ren. Open ad-hoc categorization with
contextualized feature learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2025.
[50] Sehyun Kwon, Jaeseung Park, Minkyu Kim, Jaewoong Cho, Ernest K Ryu, and Kangwook Lee. Image
clustering conditioned on text criteria. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2024.
[51] Nam Vo, Lu Jiang, Chen Sun, Kevin Murphy, Li-Jia Li, Li Fei-Fei, and James Hays. Composing text
and image for image retrieval-an empirical odyssey. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 6439–6448, 2019.
[52] Zheyuan Liu, Cristian Rodriguez-Opazo, Damien Teney, and Stephen Gould. Image retrieval on real-life
images with pre-trained vision-and-language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 2125–2134, 2021.
[53] Kuniaki Saito, Kihyuk Sohn, Xiang Zhang, Chun-Liang Li, Chen-Yu Lee, Kate Saenko, and Tomas Pfister.
Pic2Word: Mapping pictures to words for zero-shot composed image retrieval. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 19305–19314, 2023.
[54] Alberto Baldrati, Lorenzo Agnolucci, Marco Bertini, and Alberto Del Bimbo. Zero-shot composed image
retrieval with textual inversion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV), pages 15338–15347, 2023.
[55] Xiaohua Zhai, Basil Mustafa, Alexander Kolesnikov, and Lucas Beyer. Sigmoid loss for language image
pre-training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
pages 11975–11986, 2023.
[56] Mehdi Cherti, Romain Beaumont, Ross Wightman, Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Cade Gordon,
Christoph Schuhmann, Ludwig Schmidt, and Jenia Jitsev. Reproducible scaling laws for contrastive
language-image learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 2818–2829, 2023.
[57] Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. BLIP: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. In International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), pages 12888–12900. PMLR, 2022.
[58] Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Silvio Savarese, and Steven Hoi. BLIP-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
training with frozen image encoders and large language models. In International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), 2023.
[59] Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Shusheng Yang, Shijie Wang, Sinan Tan, Peng Wang, Junyang Lin, Chang Zhou,
and Jingren Zhou. Qwen-VL: A versatile vision-language model for understanding, localization, text
reading, and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12966, 2023.
[60] Peng Wang, Shuai Bai, Sinan Tan, Shijie Wang, Zhihao Fan, Jinze Bai, Keqin Chen, Xuejing Liu, Jialin
Wang, Wenbin Ge, et al. Qwen2-VL: Enhancing vision-language model’s perception of the world at any
resolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12191, 2024.
13
[61] Qwen Team. Qwen3.5: Unified vision-language foundation with early-fusion multimodal training.
https://github.com/QwenLM/Qwen3.5, 2026. Technical blog post.
[62] Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel Lenc,
Arthur Mensch, Katherine Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring, Eliza Rutherford, Serkan Cabi,
Tengda Han, Zhitao Gong, Sina Samangooei, Marianne Monteiro, Jacob Menick, Sebastian Borgeaud,
Andrew Brock, Aida Nematzadeh, Sahand Sharifzadeh, Mikolaj Binkowski, Ricardo Barreira, Oriol
Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Karen Simonyan. Flamingo: a visual language model for few-shot
learning. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho, editors, Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
[63] Bo Li, Yuanhan Zhang, Dong Guo, Renrui Zhang, Feng Li, Hao Zhang, Kaichen Zhang, Yanwei Li, Ziwei
Liu, and Chunyuan Li. LLaVA-OneVision: Easy visual task transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03326,
2024.
[64] Zhiyu Wu, Xiaokang Chen, Zizheng Pan, Xingchao Liu, Wen Liu, Damai Dai, Huazuo Gao, Yiyang Ma,
Chengyue Wu, Bingxuan Wang, Zhenda Xie, Yu Wu, Kai Hu, Jiawei Wang, Yaofeng Sun, Yukun Li,
Yishi Piao, Kang Guan, Aixin Liu, Xin Xie, Yuxiang You, Kai Dong, Xingkai Yu, Haowei Zhang, Liang
Zhao, Yisong Wang, and Chong Ruan. Deepseek-vl2: Mixture-of-experts vision-language models for
advanced multimodal understanding, 2024.
[65] Rui Meng, Ziyan Jiang, Ye Liu, Mingyi Su, Xinyi Yang, Yuepeng Fu, Can Qin, Zeyuan Chen, Ran Xu,
Caiming Xiong, et al. VLM2Vec-V2: Advancing multimodal embedding for videos, images, and visual
documents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.04590, 2025.
[66] Rongyao Fang, Aldrich Yu, Chengqi Duan, Linjiang Huang, Shuai Bai, Yuxuan Cai, Kun Wang, Si Liu,
Xihui Liu, and Hongsheng Li. Flux-reason-6m & prism-bench: A million-scale text-to-image reasoning
dataset and comprehensive benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.09680, 2025.
[67] Ziyan Jiang, Rui Meng, Xinyi Yang, Semih Yavuz, Yingbo Zhou, and Wenhu Chen. VLM2Vec: Training
vision-language models for massive multimodal embedding tasks. In International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025.
[68] Chankyu Lee, Rajarshi Roy, Mengyao Xu, Jonathan Raiman, Mohammad Shoeybi, Bryan Catanzaro,
and Wei Ping. NV-Embed: Improved techniques for training LLMs as generalist embedding models. In
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025.
[69] Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and
Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
[70] Jona Ruthardt, Manu Gaur, Deva Ramanan, Makarand Tapaswi, and Yuki M Asano. Steerable visual
representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.02327, 2026.
[71] Weiyun Wang, Zhangwei Gao, Lixin Gu, Hengjun Pu, Long Cui, Xingguang Wei, Zhaoyang Liu, Linglin
Jing, Shenglong Ye, Jie Shao, et al. Internvl3. 5: Advancing open-source multimodal models in versatility,
reasoning, and efficiency. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.18265, 2025.
[72] Alina Kuznetsova, Hassan Rom, Neil Alldrin, Jasper Uijlings, Ivan Krasin, Jordi Pont-Tuset, Shahab
Kamali, Stefan Popov, Matteo Malloci, Alexander Kolesnikov, Tom Duerig, and Vittorio Ferrari. The
Open Images Dataset V4: Unified image classification, object detection, and visual relationship detection
at scale. International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 2020.
[73] Wei Ren Tan, Chee Seng Chan, Hernan Aguirre, and Kiyoshi Tanaka. Improved artgan for conditional
synthesis of natural image and artwork. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 28(1):394–409, 2019.
[74] Nupur Kumari, Sheng-Yu Wang, Nanxuan Zhao, Yotam Nitzan, Yuheng Li, Krishna Kumar Singh,
Richard Zhang, Eli Shechtman, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Xun Huang. Learning an image editing model without
image editing pairs. In ICLR, 2026.
[75] Grace Luo, Jonathan Granskog, Aleksander Holynski, and Trevor Darrell. Dual-process image generation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01955, 2025.
[76] Zeyue Xue, Jie Wu, Yu Gao, Fangyuan Kong, Lingting Zhu, Mengzhao Chen, Zhiheng Liu, Wei Liu,
Qiushan Guo, Weilin Huang, and Ping Luo. DanceGRPO: Unleashing GRPO on visual generation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2505.07818, 2025.
[77] Tamar Rott Shaham, Sarah Schwettmann, Franklin Wang, Achyuta Rajaram, Evan Hernandez, Jacob
Andreas, and Antonio Torralba. A multimodal automated interpretability agent. In ICML, 2024.
[78] Viacheslav Surkov, Chris Wendler, Antonio Mari, Mikhail Terekhov, Justin Deschenaux, Robert West,
Caglar Gulcehre, and David Bau. One-step is enough: Sparse autoencoders for text-to-image diffusion
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.22366, 2024.
[79] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao,
Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388, 2025.
14
[80] Black Forest Labs. FLUX.1: Open-weight rectified flow transformers for text-to-image generation.
https://blackforestlabs.ai/announcing-black-forest-labs/, 2024.
[81] Zhangqi Jiang, Zheng Sun, Xianfang Zeng, Yufeng Yang, Xuanyang Zhang, Yongliang Wu, Wei Cheng,
Gang Yu, Xu Yang, and Bihan Wen. Geditbench v2: A human-aligned benchmark for general image
editing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.28547, 2026.
[82] Chaorui Deng, Deyao Zhu, Kunchang Li, Chenhui Gou, Feng Li, Zeyu Wang, Shu Zhong, Weihao Yu,
Xiaonan Nie, Ziang Song, et al. Emerging properties in unified multimodal pretraining. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.14683, 2025.
[83] Black Forest Labs. FLUX.2: Frontier visual intelligence. https://bfl.ai/blog/flux-2, 2025.
[84] Meituan LongCat Team. LongCat-Image technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.07584, 2025.
[85] Chenyuan Wu et al. OmniGen2: Towards instruction-aligned multimodal generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.18871, 2025.
[86] Qwen Team. Qwen-Image-Edit: Image editing with higher quality and efficiency. https://qwenlm.
github.io/blog/qwen-image-edit, 2025.
[87] Step1X-Image Team. Step1X-Edit: A practical framework for general image editing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.17761, 2025.
[88] Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. Scaling in-the-wild training for diffusion-based
illumination harmonization and editing by imposing consistent light transport. In International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025.
[89] Yong Liu, Wenpeng Xiao, Qianqian Wang, et al. DreamLight: Towards harmonious and consistent image
relighting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.14549, 2025.
[90] Jianqi Chen, Yilan Zhang, Zhengxia Zou, Keyan Chen, and Zhenwei Shi. Zero-shot image harmonization
with generative model prior. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 27:4494–4507, 2025.
[91] Jonathan T. Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Dor Verbin, Pratul P. Srinivasan, and Peter Hedman. Mip-NeRF 360:
Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance fields. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2022.
[92] Matthew Tancik, Ethan Weber, Evonne Ng, Ruilong Li, Brent Yi, Justin Kerr, Terrance Wang, Alexander
Kristoffersen, Jake Austin, Kamyar Salahi, Abhik Ahuja, David McAllister, and Angjoo Kanazawa.
Nerfstudio: A modular framework for neural radiance field development. In ACM SIGGRAPH Conference
Proceedings, 2023.
[93] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis. 3D Gaussian splatting
for real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics (SIGGRAPH), 2023.
[94] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren
Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In ECCV, 2020.
[95] Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller. Instant neural graphics primitives
with a multiresolution hash encoding. ACM Transactions on Graphics (SIGGRAPH), 2022.
[96] Jianfeng Xiang, Zelong Lv, Sicheng Xu, Yu Deng, Ruicheng Wang, Bowen Zhang, Dong Chen, Xin Tong,
and Jiaolong Yang. Structured 3d latents for scalable and versatile 3d generation. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 21469–21480, 2025.
[97] Jiale Xu, Weihao Cheng, Yiming Gao, Xintao Wang, Shenghua Gao, and Ying Shan. InstantMesh:
Efficient 3D mesh generation from a single image with sparse-view large reconstruction models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2404.07191, 2024.
[98] Tencent Hunyuan3D Team. Hunyuan3D 2.1: From images to high-fidelity 3D assets with production-
ready PBR material. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15442, 2025.
[99] StepFun Step1X-3D Team. Step1X-3D: Towards high-fidelity and controllable generation of textured 3D
assets. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.07747, 2025.
[100] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. SGDR: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. In International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017.
[101] Zihao Zhao, Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Dan Klein, and Sameer Singh. Calibrate before use: Improving
few-shot performance of language models. In International conference on machine learning, pages
12697–12706. Pmlr, 2021.
[102] Chujie Zheng, Hao Zhou, Fandong Meng, Jie Zhou, and Minlie Huang. Large language models are not
robust multiple choice selectors. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
[103] Peiyi Wang, Lei Li, Liang Chen, Zefan Cai, Dawei Zhu, Binghuai Lin, Yunbo Cao, Lingpeng Kong,
Qi Liu, Tianyu Liu, et al. Large language models are not fair evaluators. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 9440–9450,
2024.
15
[104] Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. RoBERTa: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining approach.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692, 2019.
[105] Dan Hendrycks, Steven Basart, Norman Mu, Saurav Kadavath, Frank Wang, Evan Dorundo, Rahul Desai,
Tyler Zhu, Samyak Parajuli, Mike Guo, Dawn Song, Jacob Steinhardt, and Justin Gilmer. The many faces
of robustness: A critical analysis of out-of-distribution generalization. ICCV, 2021.
A
Dataset collection and curation
We extend Section 3 and provide the full curation pipeline behind the synthetic odd-one-out dataset
used for training and in-distribution evaluation (Section A.1), and the vision-algorithm 2AFC set
used for out-of-distribution evaluation (Section A.2). Throughout, we use the term aspect for the text
condition c (e.g., lighting, color tone, scene geometry).
Annotation crowdsourcing. We collect annotations on Amazon Mechanical Turk and Prolific.
Reward per task is set to target an effective hourly rate of $10/hour. Sentinel checks are applied to
every session. A sentinel triplet is constructed by duplicating one image from a real triplet, making
the correct odd-one-out visually unambiguous. Sessions that fail the sentinels are returned, and the
corresponding responses are excluded.
Per-aspect “can’t tell” filter. To handle the case where the visual aspect condition is ambiguous,
our annotation interface includes a “can’t tell” option in addition to the image choices. We collect
5 annotations per triplet, discard the “can’t tell” vote, and only train and test on the image votes.
To ensure sufficient votes for all visual aspects in the test set, we discard any aspect if 3 or more
annotators mark “can’t tell” in the test set. The filter is applied independently per aspect. A triplet
may keep some aspects and lose others, and we drop the triplet only when no aspect remains.
A.1
Odd-one-out dataset
Image generation. We use the FLUX-Reason-6M [66] caption pool as base prompts. For each base
prompt, an instruction-tuned LLM (Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 [79]) authors three controlled prompt
variations along a small set of pre-specified axes (e.g., color, lighting, composition), so that within a
triplet the three prompts deliberately differ on at least one axis. The three prompts are then rendered
by FLUX.1-dev [80] with a shared random seed, 50 sampling steps, and guidance scale of 4.0. Below
are the instructions to generate the prompt variation:
System Prompt
You are an expert at generating perceptual variations for odd-one-out perceptual
studies.
TASK: Given a base text prompt, generate THREE CLEARLY DISTINGUISHABLE
text-to-image prompts (0, 1, 2) that form an interesting odd-one-out triplet.
GOAL: These images will be shown to humans who must identify which image is
"most different" from the others. For each visual FACTOR you vary, TWO images
should be SIMILAR and ONE should be the "ODD" one (clearly different).
CRITICAL DESIGN PRINCIPLES:
1. Vary 5-7 visual factors across the triplet
2. For EACH factor: two images share a similar value, one image is distinctly
different
3. DISTRIBUTE the "odd" role across images - don't make one image odd for all
factors!
- Example: Image 0 might be odd for "lighting" and "pose"
- Image 1 might be odd for "background" and "texture"
- Image 2 might be odd for "camera angle" and "color"
4. This creates an INTERESTING perceptual puzzle where each image is "odd" in
some ways but "similar" in others
VISUAL FACTORS TO VARY (use contextual names, not category names):
16
- Color & Illumination →"lighting warmth", "shadow direction", "brightness
level"
- Material & Texture →"sofa fabric", "surface glossiness", "wood grain"
- Geometry & Shape & Pose →"cat pose", "flower arrangement", "building
height"
- Background & Environment →"sky condition", "room clutter", "weather"
- Composition & Spatial Arrangement →"object spacing", "framing tightness"
- Camera →"camera distance", "viewing angle", "depth of field"
- Photographic Style →"color saturation", "film grain", "contrast level"
REQUIREMENTS:
1. All three must describe the same subject(s) or scene
2. Use VIVID, SPECIFIC descriptors - avoid "slightly" or "somewhat"
3. Each prompt should produce an image DISTINGUISHABLE AT A GLANCE
4. Factor names must be contextual: "cat pose" not "Geometry & Shape"
5. Keep factor names short and understandable by non-experts
EXAMPLE for "A golden retriever in a park":
{
"metadata": {
"num_variations": 3,
"factors": [
{"name": "dog pose", "odd_image": 0, "similar_value": "sitting upright",
"odd_value": "lying down"},
{"name": "lighting", "odd_image": 1, "similar_value": "bright sunny",
"odd_value": "overcast diffuse"},
{"name": "background trees", "odd_image": 2, "similar_value": "lush
green", "odd_value": "autumn orange"},
{"name": "grass length", "odd_image": 0, "similar_value": "short
manicured", "odd_value": "tall wild"},
{"name": "camera angle", "odd_image": 1, "similar_value": "eye level",
"odd_value": "low angle looking up"},
{"name": "depth of field", "odd_image": 2, "similar_value": "sharp
throughout", "odd_value": "blurred background"}
]
},
"triplets": [
{"id": 0, "prompt_or_edit_or_video_instruction": "A golden retriever lying
down in tall wild grass in a sunny park with lush green trees, eye level
shot, sharp focus throughout, bright natural lighting"},
{"id": 1, "prompt_or_edit_or_video_instruction": "A golden retriever sitting
upright in short manicured grass in a park under overcast diffuse light, low
angle looking up, lush green trees, sharp focus throughout"},
{"id": 2, "prompt_or_edit_or_video_instruction": "A golden retriever sitting
upright in short manicured grass in a sunny park with autumn orange trees,
eye level shot, blurred background, bright natural lighting"}
]
}
OUTPUT FORMAT: Return ONLY valid JSON with the structure shown above.
Remember: Make each image "odd" for roughly 2-3 factors, creating an interesting
perceptual puzzle!
Aspect proposal and refinement. Each triplet inherits the proposed aspects from its prompt-variation
step. Because the prompt-to-image mapping is not faithful, we additionally pass the rendered triplet
and its candidate aspect list to GPT-5.2 [12] and ask it to drop aspects that are not visibly varying
across the three images and to add visually salient aspects that the prompts did not specify. The
refinement instruction is:
System Prompt
You are analyzing three horizontally concatenated images (left, middle, right).
17
INITIAL AXES OF VARIATION:
<list of aspects inserted here>
TASK: Refine the initial axes based on the images. Keep most axes, remove only
irrelevant ones, and add any new axes for visual differences that are actually
present.
RULES (must be strictly followed):
1. Each axis must be a single, concise noun phrase.
2. Do NOT use the words "and", "or", "not", parentheses, asterisks, commas, or
any other symbols in an axis.
3. Always name axes contextually for the subject (e.g., "cat pose", "sky
brightness", "table material").
4. Always include axes for pose, orientation, geometry, size, or viewpoint if
subjects vary.
5. Include axes for color, lighting, material, texture, background, composition,
camera, or photographic style if relevant.
6. Output only axes that actually vary between the images.
7. Do not hallucinate axes that are not visually evident.
8. Provide 5-10 axes sorted by importance, most important first.
OUTPUT FORMAT: Numbered list
1. [Most important axis]
2. [Second axis]
3. ...
The output is an over-complete refined aspect list, which is then pruned by the can’t-tell filter from
human annotation.
Annotation interface. Annotators see three triangle-arranged images and a list of refined aspects
rendered as draggable chips. For each aspect, they drag the chip onto the image they consider the
odd-one-out, or onto a “can’t tell” bin (Figure 9). Each triplet is annotated by 5 workers; after the
can’t-tell filter, the remaining votes form a categorical distribution y ∈∆3 over the three image
positions. We additionally include one “overall” aspect per triplet by asking an unconditional question
“which image looks most different overall?”. We treat “overall” as a regular aspect condition during
training and evaluation.
Odd-One-Out (Overall)
Odd-One-Out (Aspects)
Figure 9: Odd-one-out annotation interface. Annotators are shown three images. (Left) Annotators
click the most different-looking image overall. (Right) Annotators are given a list of aspects as
draggable chips, and assign each aspect either to the image they perceive as the odd-one-out or to
“can’t tell”.
18
Table 2: Algorithms and aspects used in the 2AFC set. We report the algorithms used for our
2AFC set and the number of triplet occurrences for each algorithm, along with the aspect list used.
Source
Algorithm (# triplets it appears in)
Aspect list
Image
editing
BAGEL (67), FLUX2-dev (83), LongCat-Image-Edit
(72), OmniGen2 (92), Qwen-Image-Edit (64),
Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 (69), Step1X-Edit v1.2 (65)
6–10 aspects predicted by GPT-5.2 per sample and
human-pruned
Image
compositing
IC-Light (197), DreamLight (195),
Diff-Harmonization (196)
(fg-ref) facial features, hair texture, clothing detail;
(bg-ref) lighting direction, lighting warmth, color
tone, illumination
Novel view
synthesis
Splatfacto (120), Nerfacto (120), Instant-NGP (120)
scene geometry, scene sharpness, texture detail, color
tone, lighting brightness
Single-
image 3D
TRELLIS.2-4B (197), InstantMesh (199),
Hunyuan3D-2.1 (199), Step1X-3D (199)
3D shape, surface texture, material, color tone,
camera pose, object size
Figure 10: 2AFC annotation interface. Annotators see a reference image (center) and two candidates
on two sides and select, for each aspect, which candidate is more similar to the reference, or “can’t
tell”.
A.2
2AFC out-of-distribution evaluation set
The 2AFC set is curated from outputs of real vision algorithms across four sources: image editing,
image compositing, novel view synthesis (NVS), and single-image 3D. Each source contributes
a reference image xref and outputs from multiple algorithms; a triplet pairs xref with two outputs
from different algorithms, and the annotator picks the output more similar to xref for each aspect.
Algorithms and aspect lists per source are summarized in Table 2.
Image editing. Sources are drawn from GEditBench v2 [81], which includes 16 methods. We
keep the 7 methods: BAGEL [82], FLUX2-dev [83], LongCat-Image-Edit [84], OmniGen2 [85],
Qwen-Image-Edit [86], Qwen-Image-Edit-2511 [86], Step1X-Edit v1.2 [87]). The rest are dropped
either because they crop or resize the input on at least some samples or because they are near-
duplicate intermediate releases of one of the kept models. We further discard four edit categories
from GEditBench v2 (chart editing, in-image text translation, text editing, and line-to-image) since
they contains visual content out of our interest (e.g., text renders, charts, line sketches). For each
sample, GPT-5.2 names the target aspect that the edit instruction explicitly changes (e.g., background
setting for the instruction “replace the background with a modern office”) and 6–10 preserved aspects
that should remain identical to the reference; both lists are then human-pruned. Both target and
19
preserved aspects are kept in the annotation list. Each triplet pairs the source photograph with two
edits from different, random-selected methods of the same instruction. We drop triplets whose human
majority votes are the same image for every aspect, since these are usually dominated by one method
barely modifying the input.
Image compositing. We use 10 foreground images of portraits crossed with 30 background reference
photographs and run three methods on each pair: IC-Light (text-foreground-background-conditioned
model) [88], DreamLight [89], and zero-shot Diff-Harmonization [90]. Each foreground-background
pair yields two reference modes: foreground-reference (the foreground is xref and the aspects describe
subject preservation) and background-reference (the background photograph is xref, and the aspects
describe background preservation). We take random subsets from this collection to ensure the dataset
size matches the other tasks.
Novel view synthesis. We use 6 scenes from Mip-NeRF 360 [91] and 3 nerfstudio methods [92]:
Splatfacto (3D Gaussian Splatting [93]), Nerfacto [94], and Instant-NGP [95]. All methods receive
the same training views and render the same held-out poses; the reference image is the held-out
ground-truth photograph at the test pose.
Single-image 3D. We use inputs from 3D Arena and 4 methods: TRELLIS.2 [96], InstantMesh [97],
Hunyuan3D-2.1 [98], and Step1X-3D [99]. Each method’s mesh is re-rendered in Blender at 4
spaced-out azimuth angles per object; the reference image is the source photograph. Since there is no
consistent canonical view for each method, camera poses from each method are randomly different
from the reference. Hence, we also annotate and evaluate camera pose similarity in this setting.
Annotation interface. Each triplet is presented as [xcand A | xref | xcand B], with the reference in the
center. Per triplet, annotators are shown the aspect list and select, for each aspect, which candidate
is more similar to the reference, or “can’t tell” (Figure 10). Each (triplet, aspect) is annotated by 5
workers, and we apply the “can’t-tell” filter as before. Following Section 3.2, we additionally drop
aspects whose post-filter vote is exactly tied. Unlike the odd-one-out evaluation, the 2AFC evaluation
does not include an “overall” aspect: every comparison is explicitly conditioned on a visual aspect.
B
Additional results
Extending Section 5, we provide additional analysis and benchmark evaluation in Section B.1, and
we include additional ablations in Section B.2.
B.1
Additional analysis and benchmarks
Table 3 includes analysis from more models, measured by their agreement with humans.
Triplet oracle. Section 5 reports evaluation on pairwise metrics. Our goal is to create an algorithm
that can judge pairwise distance, using the odd-one-out triplet task as a pretext training signal. Here,
though the odd-one-out task is not the primary task, as an advantaged “oracle”, we provide all 3
images to the VLM, and see how closely our pairwise algorithm (which only sees 2 images at a time)
compares. To do so, we ask the model: “Which image is the most different among the three in terms
of <aspect>?”, same as what the human annotators answered. This makes even untrained VLMs
strong baselines under the triplet prompt. While Gemini-3.1-Pro reaches 62.0% on odd-one-out and
GPT-5.4 reaches 77.9% total on 2AFC, our early fusion method still outperforms even without the
structural advantage.
In addition, we verify that finetuning a generative VLM to solve the odd-one-out task directly with
the triplet yields the strongest result (see Ours-Triplet). However, such a model produces only a
triplet decision and not a pairwise score, and therefore does not transfer to 2AFC evaluation and
retrieval. The pairwise design is what makes the metric usable across all of these settings.
Effect of model size. As expected, for most model families, agreement with humans increases with
backbone size on both the in-distribution odd-one-out test and the 2AFC total. For example, in
early fusion baselines, InternVL3.5 climbs 45.4% →54.2% from 1B to 14B, and Qwen3-VL climbs
51.0% →54.5% from 2B to 8B. In our ablation studies (Section B.2), we also find that our method’s
performance improves with model size (Table 6).
20
Table 3: Agreement with humans across model families and sizes. We show the best per-task type
in bold and second-best underlined; gray values are standard errors over the test set. For the triplet
task, our method variant is explicitly trained on odd-one-out tasks and does not apply to 2AFC tests.
Type
Family
Size
Odd-One-Out
(in-distribution)
2AFC (out-of-distribution)
Editing
Composite
NVS
Im-to-3D
Total
Classic
LPIPS
62M
46.2±0.2
62.2±1.0
69.4±1.3
96.9±0.5
65.9±1.0
69.5±0.6
DreamSim
258M
50.5±0.2
63.7±1.0
67.0±1.4
96.6±0.5
75.8±0.9
72.9±0.5
Triplet
GPT-5.4
–
57.6±0.2
69.4±1.0
78.6±1.1
96.6±0.5
78.5±0.8
77.9±0.5
Gemini-3.1-Pro
–
62.0±0.2
70.6±0.9
74.6±1.2
96.1±0.6
74.4±0.9
76.1±0.5
InternVL3.5
1B
38.9±0.2
50.6±1.1
50.8±1.5
54.5±1.9
51.0±1.1
51.3±0.6
2B
40.0±0.2
52.7±1.1
63.0±1.4
66.2±1.8
56.7±1.1
57.7±0.6
4B
53.9±0.2
60.4±1.0
63.6±1.4
77.1±1.6
71.5±0.9
67.1±0.6
8B
53.3±0.2
61.9±1.0
69.3±1.3
92.4±0.9
68.2±1.0
69.6±0.6
14B
56.0±0.2
63.3±1.0
71.5±1.3
86.5±1.2
76.6±0.9
72.5±0.6
LLAVA-OV
0.5B
45.2±0.2
53.7±1.1
51.3±1.5
68.5±1.8
51.1±1.1
54.4±0.6
7B
53.9±0.2
62.7±1.0
69.7±1.3
86.9±1.2
77.1±0.9
72.2±0.6
Qwen3-VL
2B
47.8±0.2
58.4±1.1
64.1±1.4
91.5±1.0
68.3±1.0
67.3±0.6
4B
56.1±0.2
64.0±1.0
67.1±1.4
95.4±0.7
77.3±0.9
73.4±0.5
8B
57.1±0.2
63.8±1.0
68.1±1.3
95.1±0.7
78.6±0.8
73.9±0.5
Ours
8B
65.0±0.2
–
–
–
–
–
Early Fusion
GPT-5.4
–
55.5±0.2
67.0±1.0
73.8±1.2
96.8±0.5
71.3±1.0
73.7±0.5
Gemini-3.1-Pro
–
58.4±0.2
65.5±1.0
66.5±1.4
90.8±1.0
70.1±1.0
70.7±0.6
InternVL3.5
1B
45.4±0.2
57.2±1.1
69.8±1.3
88.7±1.1
63.2±1.0
65.8±0.6
2B
46.3±0.2
61.5±1.0
70.7±1.3
82.3±1.4
72.6±0.9
69.8±0.6
4B
53.1±0.2
57.9±1.1
71.1±1.3
25.2±1.6
74.5±0.9
61.5±0.6
8B
53.5±0.2
60.2±1.0
64.6±1.4
45.4±1.9
75.4±0.9
64.2±0.6
14B
54.2±0.2
55.5±1.1
53.9±1.5
23.6±1.6
73.2±0.9
57.0±0.6
LLAVA-OV
0.5B
30.1±0.2
51.0±1.1
51.1±1.5
65.7±1.8
35.7±1.0
47.7±0.6
7B
44.5±0.2
57.7±1.1
62.0±1.4
69.4±1.7
72.7±0.9
65.2±0.6
Qwen3-VL
2B
51.0±0.2
60.4±1.0
68.7±1.3
93.1±0.9
74.3±0.9
71.1±0.6
4B
55.1±0.2
61.1±1.0
70.4±1.3
88.5±1.2
76.1±0.9
71.6±0.6
8B
54.5±0.2
55.4±1.1
56.5±1.5
47.3±1.9
69.0±1.0
59.2±0.6
Ours
8B
64.7±0.2
72.5±0.9
75.6±1.2
96.6±0.5
81.2±0.8
79.3±0.5
Mid-Fusion
Qwen3-VL-Emb
2B
43.9±0.2
61.4±1.0
72.0±1.3
96.6±0.5
69.9±1.0
71.0±0.6
8B
44.0±0.2
61.5±1.0
71.3±1.3
96.7±0.5
72.7±0.9
71.9±0.6
Ours
8B
63.8±0.2
71.2±0.9
64.2±1.4
96.8±0.5
78.1±0.8
75.9±0.5
Late Fusion
Gemini-2-Embedding
–
54.1±0.2
61.5±1.0
61.5±1.4
95.8±0.6
75.9±0.9
71.2±0.6
VLM2Vec v2.0
2B
53.0±0.2
62.3±1.0
66.6±1.4
90.9±1.0
73.5±0.9
70.8±0.6
SteerViT
86M
51.4±0.2
67.9±1.0
66.0±1.4
96.6±0.5
75.2±0.9
74.0±0.5
GeneCIS
150M
44.9±0.2
62.4±1.0
71.8±1.3
96.3±0.6
72.7±0.9
72.2±0.6
Qwen3-VL-Emb
2B
56.7±0.2
64.4±1.0
70.0±1.3
92.7±0.9
77.9±0.8
73.9±0.5
8B
58.3±0.2
62.9±1.0
68.6±1.3
94.5±0.7
78.1±0.8
73.5±0.5
Ours
8B
64.1±0.2
71.2±0.9
72.1±1.3
96.6±0.5
80.0±0.8
77.9±0.5
Human confidence vs. model’s agreement with humans. As the perceptual task is subjective, often
humans do not agree 100% on a given example. In Figure 11, we plot model performance against τ,
how often humans agree with their top selected choice. Recall that 5 annotators are used per aspect,
with some removed if they select “can’t tell”. Hence, τ increases at specific values (e.g, 3
5, 4
5, 3
4,
etc). As expected, at high confidence levels τ, performance rises monotonically for all methods,
as low-confidence predictions are filtered out. The method rankings remain consistent across the
entire threshold range. Our model maintains the smallest gap to human-human agreement at every τ,
demonstrating that its advantage is not threshold-sensitive.
Generalization to other benchmarks. Our proposed method extends image similarity to aspect-
conditioning. Here, we test how well the method performs on generic image similarity on previous
perceptual similarity datasets. In Table 4, we report results on BAPPS [2] and NIGHTS [3], two estab-
lished perceptual similarity benchmarks designed to train and evaluate LPIPS [2] and DreamSim [3],
respectively. Unlike our setting, these benchmarks are not aspect-conditioned and collect only overall
perceptual similarities. Notably, training exclusively on our dataset and inferencing with the “overall”
condition yields consistent improvements over the base VLM across both benchmarks, closing much
of the gap to methods trained in-domain. This suggests that our dataset captures perceptual structure
that transfers to other domains.
We also compare to a previous dataset, Queryable Attribute Representation Extraction (QARE) [48]
in Tab. 5, which creates a small synthetic dataset of different 4 objects, rendered on 4 backgrounds
and 3 artistic styles with known variations, resulting in 48 images. The benchmark queries for these 3
21
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Odd-One-Out
(in-distribution)
Early Fusion
Mid Fusion
Late Fusion
Triplet
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Human confidence threshold
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
2AFC
(out-of-distribution)
GPT-5.4
Gemini-3.1-Pro
InternVL3.5 8B
LLAVA-OV 7B
Qwen3-VL 8B
Ours
Human-human
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Human confidence threshold
Qwen3-VL-Emb 8B
Ours
Human-human
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Human confidence threshold
Gemini-2-Embedding
VLM2Vec v2.0
SteerViT
GeneCIS
Qwen3-VL-Emb 8B
Ours
Human-human
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Human confidence threshold
GPT-5.4
Gemini-3.1-Pro
InternVL3.5 8B
LLAVA-OV 7B
Qwen3-VL 8B
Human-human
Model-human agreement rate
Figure 11: Model’s agreement with humans as a function of confidence threshold. We filter by
human confidence threshold (x-axis) and report model performance (y-axis) on the retained data.
Table 4: Generalization to generic perceptual similarity: BAPPS [2] and NIGHTS [3] on low
and mid-level similarity, respectively. Standard errors are in gray. Best is bold, runner-up is
underlined. Ours is a fine-tuned late fusion model from Qwen3-VL-8B-Emb., which shows consistent
improvement, even without training on either dataset directly. Our dataset subset with only overall
conditions reported for comparison.
Method
Dataset
BAPPS
NIGHTS
Ours–overall
LPIPS
68.4±0.2
76.4±1.0
53.9±0.8
DreamSim
68.3±0.2
96.2±0.5
65.1±0.7
Qwen3-VL-8B-Emb.
65.2±0.2
87.9±0.8
60.1±0.7
Ours
67.3±0.2
94.0±0.6
66.5±0.7
attributes, and measures the recall in mAP and the tightness of the embeddings in AIS. Though not
designed for this dataset, our method performs competitively with the provided baselines.
More qualitative results. To extend Section 5, we present additional qualitative results below.
Figure 12 and Figure 13 illustrate the range of aspect-conditioned similarities. Figure 14 expands
the in-distribution odd-one-out and out-of-distribution 2AFC results. Figure 15 extends Figure 7
and provides nearest-neighbor retrieval on OpenImages [72] without the similarity adjustment.
Conditioning the same query on different aspects returns visibly different neighbor sets, and our
method still visibly outperforms the base model qualitatively in this setup. Figure 16 extends Figure 8
and provides more results on multi-query retrieval.
B.2
Additional ablations
Table 6 reports the ablation results.
Backbone scale. The 2B late-fusion model trails the 8B version by only a marginal gap on both
the odd-one-out (63.7% vs. 64.1%) and 2AFC (77.4% vs. 77.9%) tasks, offering a more efficient
alternative with competitive performance.
Data scaling. Performance saturates early. The odd-one-out metric plateaus at 60% of training data
(64.0%), and 2AFC reaches 78.0% at just 40%, on par with the full-data result. This suggests that
gains from additional data within our current collection are limited, pointing to the need for either
more diverse data or a more data-absorbing architecture.
22
Post-trained/
Zero-shot
Query-
able
Model
mAP (↑)
AIS (↓)
Method
Backbone
Params
obj
sty
bg
all
Zero-shot
✗
Vision
Encoder
CLIP
–
9.4
13.1
8.8
4.5
1.00
SigLIP
–
10.0
11.0
10.1
4.4
1.00
DINOv2
–
13.5
6.8
10.0
4.2
1.00
DINOv3
–
12.1
7.1
11.2
4.1
1.00
Zero-shot
✓
TF-QARE [48]
Qwen2-VL
2B
8.7
20.5
37.1
22.1
0.63
Qwen2-VL
7B
69.7
73.9
91.7
78.4
0.68
Qwen2.5-VL
3B
38.7
45.6
91.5
58.6
0.78
Qwen2.5-VL
7B
83.9
56.9
90.1
77.0
0.73
Qwen2.5-VL
32B
79.0
55.2
91.7
75.3
0.81
InternVL3
1B
47.8
23.5
65.6
45.6
0.74
InternVL3
2B
46.9
58.0
90.2
65.0
0.75
InternVL3
8B
78.0
56.8
91.7
75.5
0.55
InternVL3
14B
85.8
55.4
91.7
77.6
0.78
Gemma3
4B
55.6
70.4
83.9
70.0
0.88
Gemma3
12B
82.9
75.4
91.7
83.3
0.88
Post-trained
✓
VLM2VecV1 [67]
Qwen2-VL
7B
8.9
29.6
11.6
16.7
0.97
VLM2VecV2 [65]
Qwen2-VL
2B
7.9
27.0
11.2
15.4
0.82
Ours
Qwen3-VL-Emb
8B
78.6
75.1
91.6
81.7
0.67
Table 5: Generalization to QARE-Bench (Synthetic) [48] dataset. The benchmark measures
disentanglement on objects, background, and style on a small set of 48 images. Our method is
competitive with the provided benchmarks from QARE, with the highest mAP among 8B models
and close to the 12B model.
Table 6: Additional ablations. Each row flips one knob of our default models. The default rows (8B
and 100%) are the default late fusion model. “Mid-fusion default” is the default mid-fusion model.
Ablation
Family
Variant
OOO test (%)
2AFC total (%)
Backbone scale
Late fusion
2B
63.7±0.2
77.4±0.5
8B (default)
64.1±0.2
77.9±0.5
Training data fraction
Late fusion
20%
62.8±0.2
76.6±0.5
40%
63.7±0.2
78.0±0.5
60%
64.0±0.2
77.4±0.5
80%
64.0±0.2
77.5±0.5
100% (default)
64.1±0.2
77.9±0.5
Mid-fusion head
Mid-fusion
frozen backbone
45.6±0.2
72.9±0.5
no aspect conditioning for channel weights
59.8±0.2
75.1±0.5
default
63.8±0.2
75.9±0.5
Mid-fusion architecture. Freezing the backbone collapses odd-one-out and 2AFC performance
substantially (45.6% / 72.9% vs. 63.8% / 75.9% for the default), confirming that learning channel
weights alone on a frozen VLM is insufficient. Removing aspect conditioning from the channel
weights also degrades both metrics (59.8% / 75.1%), indicating that the optimal per-layer weighting
is aspect-dependent and cannot be shared across conditions.
C
Implementation details
In this section, we include training and hyperparameter details (Section C.1), architecture details for
our early fusion model (Section C.2), and baseline details (Section C.3).
C.1
Training and hyperparameter selection
Backbones. The late-fusion, mid-fusion, and early-fusion variants of our model all use Qwen3-VL-
Embedding-8B [17] as the backbone. The triplet generative variant uses Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct [14].
23
Table 7: Per-family hyperparameter search spaces. Most hyperparameters are sampled from
discrete choices, and the learning rate is sampled from a continuous log-uniform distribution.
Hyperparameter
Late fusion
Early fusion
Triplet head
Mid fusion
Backbone
Qwen3-VL-Emb-8B
Qwen3-VL-Emb-8B
Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct
Qwen3-VL-Emb-8B
LoRA rank r
{8, 16, 32, 64}
{8, 16, 32, 64}
{8, 16, 32, 64}
{8, 16, 32, 64}
Learning rate (log-uniform)
[10−5, 5×10−4]
[10−5, 5×10−4]
[10−5, 5×10−4]
[10−5, 5×10−4]
Effective batch size
{32, 64, 128, 256}
{32, 64, 128, 256}
{32, 64, 128, 256}
{32, 64, 128, 256}
Similarity temperature τ
{0.05, 0.1, 0.2}
{0.05, 0.1, 0.2}
—
log-uniform [10−3, 1.0]
# probe layers
—
—
—
{3, 5, 8, 10, 14, 20}
Table 8: Final hyperparameters used for every reported number.
Hyperparameter
Late fusion
Early fusion
Triplet head
Mid fusion
LoRA rank r
16
16
16
16
Learning rate
5×10−5
1×10−4
3×10−5
1×10−4
Effective batch size
128
128
32
32
Similarity temperature τ
0.05
0.05
—
0.0025
# probe layers
—
—
—
20
Epochs
1
1
1
1
Adaptation. We apply LoRA [69] to the language tower with lora_alpha = 2 · lora_r and dropout
0.05. The vision tower is frozen for all reported models, as we find that tuning the vision tower
doesn’t improve performance.
Optimizer and schedule. We optimize using AdamW (weight decay 0.01, gradient clipping 1.0).
The learning-rate schedule is a linear warmup over 3% of total steps followed by cosine decay to
zero [100]. The triplet variant uses two parameter groups: backbone LoRA at the listed learning rate
and the classification head at 5× that rate.
Data and per-step batching. All four models are trained on the unfiltered training split (22,157
triplets) for one epoch. Each aspect in a triplet is treated as one training example, so a triplet annotated
for k aspects contributes k optimization examples per epoch. Per-device batch size is 1; the effective
batch size is per-device batch size times gradient accumulation times eight GPUs, since our training
is done on 8-GPU nodes.
Permutation augmentation for triplet models. To alleviate position bias of vision language
models [101, 102, 103], when training triplet models, the three images of every triplet are randomly
permuted per batch item. At inference, we average over all six permutations and map probabilities
back to the original positions.
Model prompts. The aspect string c is inserted into the following prompts. For late fusion and mid
fusion (one image per forward pass):
“Represent the similarity of the image based on ⟨c ⟩.”
For early fusion (two images per forward pass):
“Measure the similarity between the two images based on ⟨c ⟩.”
The “overall” aspect drops the “based on ⟨c ⟩” suffix.
Hyperparameter sweep. We run an independent Bayesian search per family with validation human
agreement as the target. The search spaces and the selected configurations are reported in Table 7 and
Table 8, respectively.
C.2
Early-fusion architecture
We describe the attention mask and positional encoding scheme that make the early-fusion architecture
(Section 4.2) symmetric and identity-preserving by construction.
24
Input layout. The input sequence consists of four contiguous segments, with the aspect prompt first
so that image patches can attend to it in the standard VLM fashion:
t1, . . . , tM
|
{z
}
aspect tokens c
∥p(1)
1 , . . . , p(1)
N
|
{z
}
image x1 patches
∥p(2)
1 , . . . , p(2)
N
|
{z
}
image x2 patches
∥r1, r2
| {z }
registers
,
where tm are the aspect text token embeddings, p(k)
n
denotes the n-th patch embedding of image
xk (we assume both images have the same number of patches N), and r1, r2 are shared-parameter
learnable register vectors shared across all examples.
Positional encoding. We use M-RoPE [60], which assigns each token a three-dimensional position
(t, h, w). For vision tokens we override the backbone default so that both images share the same
temporal index and matching spatial indices at corresponding grid locations:
pos
 p(1)
h,w

= pos
 p(2)
h,w

= (0, h, w),
where (h, w) follow each image’s patch grid after preprocessing. Hence, the two images are distin-
guished only by token content and by the attention mask, not by the image ordering.
The aspect text is assigned sequential temporal positions t = 1, 2, . . . in sequence order, with
(h, w) = (0, 0), while reserving t = 0 for all vision patches—this differs from default two-image
preprocessing in which the second image often receives a larger temporal index.
Registers. The two registers use the same learnable embedding vector and the same M-RoPE
coordinates (treg, 0, 0) with treg set immediately after the maximum temporal index among all
preceding tokens. They are therefore not distinguished by positional encoding; only their attention
regions differ, as illustrated below.
Attention mask. The attention mask is defined by the following rules:
1. Aspect tokens are causal among themselves and hence attend to no image patches or registers,
preserving the pretrained text-only behavior of the VLM.
2. Image patches attend to all aspect tokens and to all image patches of both images, encouraging
comparisons between two sets of image features. They do not attend to the registers.
3. Registers are restricted: rk attends to the aspect tokens and to the patches of image xk only. This
encourages rk to output an image-specific representation.
The image-image block of the mask is symmetric, and the register block is symmetric in the analogous
sense: r1’s access pattern to x1 mirrors r2’s access pattern to x2.
Symmetry property. The two registers r1, r2 share the same learned embedding and the same
positional encoding, and the attention mask treats the two image slots symmetrically. So if we swap
x1 and x2, at every attention layer r1 now pools from x2 exactly as r2 did before (and vice versa);
the two register hidden states are simply exchanged. Since cosine similarity is symmetric in its
arguments,
fθ(x1, x2, c) = fθ(x2, x1, c).
Identity property. When x1 = x2 = x, the two image segments of the input sequence are token-
for-token identical and the attention mask is symmetric, so the two segments produce identical
hidden states at every transformer layer. Since r1 and r2 are tied and attend to identical contexts via
structurally identical masks, h1 = h2. Hence
fθ(x, x, c) = h⊤
1h1
∥h1∥2 = 1.
C.3
Baselines
We provide more details of the baselines reported in Section 5. We organize baselines by how the two
images interact, plus a separate triplet family that consumes three concatenated images at once. All
baselines use greedy decoding (temperature 0). To avoid position bias of VLMs [101, 102, 103], for
triplet and pairwise-score baselines we apply permutation averaging—6 orderings for odd-one-out,
2 for 2AFC—and map results back to the original positions. Embedding baselines do not need
permutation averaging because cosine similarity is symmetric.
25
Triplet baselines. The three input images are concatenated horizontally and the model is asked which
side is the odd one out. We use the prompt:
“I provide three horizontally concatenated images (left, middle, right). Which image is the
most different among the three in terms of ⟨c ⟩? You need to choose: left, middle, right.
Answer:”
For 2AFC the three positions become reference (center) and two candidates (left, right):
“I provide three horizontally concatenated images. The center image is the reference. Which
candidate (left or right) is more similar to the reference in terms of ⟨c ⟩? Answer with one
word: left or right. Answer:”
When the aspect condition is “overall”, we remove “in terms of ⟨c ⟩” in these prompts.
For open-weight models, we read logits at the answer position for the three (resp. two) target tokens
and softmax. Models include InternVL3.5 [71], Qwen3-VL [14], and LLaVA-OneVision [63]. API
models (GPT-5.4 [12], Gemini 3.1 Pro [13]) use text parsing.
Pairwise 0–10 score baselines. The same VLMs are also evaluated in a pairwise mode, where each
pair of images is rated for similarity on an integer scale of 0 (completely different) to 10 (identical).
The prompt is:
“I show you two images placed side by side (left and right). Rate how similar these two
images are in terms of ⟨c ⟩on a scale of 0 to 10, where 0 means completely different and 10
means identical. Answer with a single number from 0 to 10. Answer:”
When the aspect is “overall”, we swap out “in terms of ⟨c ⟩” to “overall” in the prompt. We convert
the response to a soft score either as E[d] = P10
d=0 d · P(d) over digit-token logprobs. For API
calls where we can only obtain the generated text, each text response is converted to a one-hot delta
distribution over choices. The three pairwise scores per triplet are converted to a 3-way odd-one-out
distribution by softmaxing the complementary-pair score (so the highest similarity between two
images implies the third is the odd one out); for 2AFC we softmax the two reference–candidate
scores.
Late-fusion (embedding) baselines. Each image is embedded independently, optionally conditioned
on a short aspect prompt; pairwise similarity is the cosine of the two embeddings. The 3-way odd-
one-out and 2AFC distributions are formed by the same softmax aggregation as the pairwise-score
baselines.
Qwen3-VL-Embedding [17] (2B and 8B). The natively multimodal encoder version of Qwen3-VL
with last-token pooling and L2-normalized output. We use the prompt “Represent the visual similarity
of this image in terms of ⟨c ⟩.”.
VLM2Vec v2.0 [16, 65]. A LoRA adapter on top of Qwen2-VL-2B-Instruct [60], used as released.
We use the same prompt as Qwen3-VL-Embedding and pool the last non-pad hidden state.
SteerViT [70]. A DINOv2-based ViT [23] augmented with steerable cross-attention that consumes a
short aspect string. SteerViT’s text encoder is RoBERTa [104] rather than an instruction-tuned LLM,
so the verbose embedding prompt above is shortened to the aspect token only (e.g., “lighting”). For
the “overall” aspect we pass no text, which falls back to the unconditional DINOv2 backbone.
GeneCIS [8]. A CLIP ViT-B/16 [22] fine-tuned on conditional image-similarity triplets mined from
existing vision-language datasets. As with SteerViT, CLIP’s text encoder is short-text-friendly rather
than instruction-tuned, so we feed the aspect token directly (e.g., “lighting”).
Gemini Embedding 2 [13]. The natively multimodal embedding model, used via the official API.
We interleave the aspect text and the image bytes inside a single content object so the embedding is
aspect-conditioned.
Mid-fusion baseline. For completeness we report a frozen Qwen3-VL-Embedding (2B and 8B) used
in the LPIPS-style mid-fusion configuration: pairwise similarity is the negative aspect-conditioned ℓ2
distance over selected language-tower layers (Equation 3). This is the same architectural class as our
trained mid-fusion variant but without the trained channel-weight head, and isolates the contribution
of training.
26
D
Additional details
D.1
Compute cost
All training and inference reported in this paper were run on eight NVIDIA A100 80GB nodes. We
describe the runtime cost below.
Dataset construction. Curating the odd-one-out dataset took around 24 GPU days for FLUX image
generation and around 8 GPU days for the Qwen3 text prompt variations. Curating the 2AFC dataset
took around 20 GPU hours for image compositing, 5 GPU hours for NVS, and 30 GPU hours for
image-to-3D. We directly downloaded image editing results from GEditBench v2 [87].
Final model training. Per-run wall-clock on eight A100s: late fusion 4.5 hours, mid fusion 9 hours,
early fusion 8 hours, triplet head 7 hours.
D.2
Licenses
Below we list the licenses of code, data, and models we used for this project.
• Qwen3-VL and Qwen3-VL-Embedding: Apache 2.0.
• InternVL3.5: Apache 2.0.
• LLaVA-OneVision: Apache 2.0.
• VLM2Vec v2.0: Apache 2.0.
• SteerViT: MIT.
• GeneCIS: CC BY-NC 4.0.
• FLUX.1-dev: FLUX.1 [dev] Non-Commercial License v1.1.1.
• FLUX-Reason-6M: Apache 2.0.
• GEditBench v2: MIT.
• Mip-NeRF 360: Apache 2.0.
• NerfStudio: Apache 2.0.
• IC-Light: Apache 2.0.
• DreamLight: CC BY 4.0.
• Diff-Harmonization: Apache 2.0.
• TRELLIS.2: MIT.
• InstantMesh: Apache 2.0.
• Hunyuan3D-2.1: Tencent Hunyuan 3D 2.1 Community License.
• Step1X-3D: Apache 2.0.
27
How similar do these images look?
overall
car
roof  style
car color
…
Dream
Sim*
car facing
direction
.35
.71
.66
.84
.60
LPIPS*
More similar
.70
…
camera
distance
.84
overall
grape size
…
Dream
Sim*
leaf color
.34
.53
.58
.82
.82
LPIPS*
More similar
.56
…
background
.66
grape color
Ours
Existing Perceptual Metrics
sim(𝑥!, 𝑥"|𝑐)
sim(𝑥!, 𝑥")
Figure 12: Examples of text-conditioned similarity score. Given two images, existing perceptual
metrics provide only a crude, overall similarity measure. Our method reveals a key aspect of the
problem by conditioning on the sense of similarity, denoted by the text-prompt c. (top) For example,
the cars share a more similar color and are taken at a similar camera distance, whereas their facing
direction and roof style are quite different. (bottom) The grape colors are different, while the grape
size and the leaf color are the same. ∗We show 1-LPIPS [2] and 1-DreamSim [3] to convert the
distances so that higher scores represent higher similarities.
Figure 13: Exploring senses of similarity with our metric. Left (Sushi): The anchor is a close-up
shot of sushi rolls. Prompts can prioritize similarity of shot composition (close-up vs. distant) or
the sushie type, distinguishing similar rolls from dissimilar sashimi. Middle (Mushrooms): The
anchor shows two white mushrooms. A color-based query sorts items from white to brown, while a
count-based query reorders them according to the number of mushrooms present. Right (Horses):
Similarity focuses either on the physical pose of the subjects or the specific texture and color of the
ground. Similarity is reported as cosine similarity, ranging from -1 to 1.
28
(a) Odd-one-out Perceptual Judgement
(b) 2AFC Perceptual Judgement
Gemini-3.1-Pro
GPT-5.4
Qwen3-VL-Embedding-8B
Ours
Human
Image 1
Image 2
Image 3
Reference
A
B
Coin stacking order
Three coin arrangement
Soft top-left lighting
Subtle coin shadows
Garnish
arrangement
Foreground
prop presence
Glass
shape profile
Rim
coating
𝑥!
𝑥"
𝑥#
Image 1
Image 2
Image 3
Reference
A
B
Facial features
Hair texture
Clothing detail
Jacket
material
Color 
saturation
Background
wall color
Camera 
distance
𝑥!
𝑥"
𝑥#
Image 1
Image 2
Image 3
Reference
A
B
Scene sharpness
Texture detail
Color tone
Lighting brightness
Color
saturation
Fork
visibility
Strawberry
placement
Background
setting
𝑥!
𝑥"
𝑥#
Image 1
Image 2
Image 3
Reference
A
B
3D shape
Color tone
Camera pose
Object size
Porch
depth
Porch column
thickness
Chair
placement
Ocean wave
visibility
𝑥!
𝑥"
𝑥#
Figure 14: Additional qualitative results. We extend Figure 4 and provide more results for our
odd-one-out and 2AFC test cases.
29
Composition
Weather Condition
Color Tone
Camera Distance
Background
Number of Objects
Composition
Background
Object Size
Query
TPIPS (Ours)
Qwen3-VL-Embed
Retrieved Images
Composition
Weather condition
Camera distance
Figure 15: Aspect-conditioned retrieval results without similarity adjustments. We extend
results from Figure 7 and show retrieval results without similarity adjustments. For each query
(left), conditioning on different aspects also returns different nearest neighbors. Left shows retrievals
on OpenImages [72] using our trained late-fusion model, where it visibly produces better-aligned
retrieval images than the base model’s retrieval on the right.
30
object category
stroke quality
rendition medium
Composited query
Retrieved images
color palette
brushwork
composition 
layout
realism level
scene setting
painting medium
rendition medium
stroke quality
color palette
Figure 16: Additional compositional retrieval results. We extend results from Figure 8. Top
two rows are compositional retrieval results from ImageNet-R [105], and the bottom two are from
WikiArt [73].
31
