HyperIso: A general BSM calculator for flavour observables
N. Fardeaua, F. Mahmoudia,b,c, T. Reymermiera,1
a Université Lyon 1, CNRS, IP2I, UMR 5822, Villeurbanne, France
b Theoretical Physics Department, CERN, CH-1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland
c Institut Universitaire de France (IUF), 75005 Paris, France
Abstract
We present HyperIso, a new standalone program for the evaluation of flavour physics
observables across a wide variety of Standard Model (SM) and Beyond-the-Standard-
Model (BSM) scenarios. The code builds on the physics heritage of SuperIso, but
is implemented as a new modular software package with a modern C++ core and
multiple user interfaces. In addition to native implementations for established scenarios
such as the SM, the general Two-Higgs-Doublet Model (THDM), and supersymmetric
models, HyperIso interfaces with the MARTY framework to compute automatically BSM
Wilson coefficients at leading order. This design makes it possible to study user-defined
BSM models while keeping the observable calculation, uncertainty propagation and
statistical interpretation in a common backend. The software provides C++, Python,
command-line and graphical interfaces. It supports the evaluation of key observables
such as the branching ratios and, where available, angular observables, for radiative,
leptonic, and semileptonic B decays, as well as for the relevant kaon and D-meson
decays, together with the muon anomalous magnetic moment (g −2). The inputs can
be provided through JSON/YAML configuration files and Les Houches Accord files,
either supplied by the user or generated by external spectrum calculators. HyperIso
therefore provides a flexible and extensible tool for flavour studies, phenomenological
scans and the validation of BSM scenarios.
Keywords: Flavour physics – Wilson coefficients – Beyond the Standard Model –
Effective field theory – Scientific computing
1Corresponding author: theo.reymermier@cern.ch
URL: http://hyperiso.in2p3.fr
1
arXiv:2607.18222v1  [hep-ph]  20 Jul 2026
1
Introduction
The study of flavour physics observables plays an important role in testing the Standard
Model (SM) and exploring potential extensions, such as Supersymmetry (SUSY), Two-Higgs-
Doublet Model (THDM), and other Beyond-the-Standard-Model (BSM) scenarios. These
observables, including branching ratios of rare decays and the muon anomalous magnetic
moment (g−2), provide sensitive probes of new physics effects. With increasing experimental
precision at experiments such as LHCb, Belle II and BaBar, theoretical tools capable of
handling complex scenarios are essential for accurately constraining BSM scenarios by
predicting observables in both standard and non-standard models and making statistical
analysis.
Existing software tools such as SuperIso [1–4] have made significant strides in enabling
such analyses. However, their scope is often limited to specific models, and their extensibility
to novel theoretical models or new effective theories remains constrained. Furthermore, user
interfaces in these tools are typically rigid, restricting accessibility for diverse users, from
phenomenologists to experimentalists.
To address these limitations, we present HyperIso [5, 6], a comprehensive software
package for evaluating flavour-physics observables in the Standard Model and in user-defined
BSM scenarios, and for performing statistical analyses. By combining a C++ core with the
MARTY framework [7–9] for generic leading-order Wilson-coefficient calculations, HyperIso
provides an extensible and high-performance calculation environment.
C++, Python,
command-line and graphical interfaces make the same backend accessible to phenomenologists,
experimentalists and software developers. HyperIso accepts Les Houches Accord (LHA)
[10–12], family inputs and can be integrated with spectrum calculators and parameter-scan
workflows.
This paper describes the design, implementation and public interfaces of HyperIso,
together with its validation, performance and reproducibility workflow. For legacy formulae,
we refer to the original SuperIso documentation [2]. Numerical comparisons have been
carried out to validate both the common calculations with SuperIso (Wilson coefficients,
observables and fits) and the MARTY generic implementation for Wilson coefficients.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 presents the design goals
and architectural principles. Sections 3 and 4 describe the software architecture, runtime
data flow and main program components. Section 5 introduces the input conventions, while
Section 6 presents the C++, Python, command-line and graphical interfaces. Section 7
summarises the theoretical framework and statistical methods. Sections 8 and 9 report
validation and performance results. Finally, Section 10 documents software availability and
the frozen reproducibility suite, and we summarise our conclusions in Section 11.
2
Design goals and principles
HyperIso follows a hexagonal, or ports-and-adapters, architecture [13]. The application
logic is organised into modules dedicated to runtime data, Wilson coefficients, observable
calculations and statistics. Each module exposes ports that define the services required or
provided by the domain, while adapters connect those ports to file formats, external programs
and public interfaces. This separation limits coupling to infrastructure and allows the domain
logic to be tested independently. The architecture of the Core module is illustrated in Fig. 1.
2
IDataLoader
ParamBlockLoader
CorrelationLoader
Core
Flags
User’s path
Observable correlations
Parameters uncertainties and 
value
QCD parameters (at 𝜇)
Load JSON, 
YAML and LHA 
inputs
Set a parameter’s 
value
Shift a parameter 
from center value
Set a function to 
calculate parameters 
from other 
parameters
Figure 1: Hexagonal architecture of the HyperIso Core module.
This architecture reduces coupling between modules and makes the physics, input,
interface and numerical layers easier to test independently.
3
Software architecture
A high-level description of the HyperIso architecture and data flow is shown in Fig. 2. The
distributed JSON files provide the default numerical database used by the code, including SM
inputs, QCD parameters, flavour parameters, nuisance distributions, observable definitions
and correlations. These defaults are intended to define a reproducible reference setup and
should not be edited directly by users.
User-level modifications are provided through YAML override files. This mechanism is
useful when a parameter value, uncertainty or distribution has to be updated to match a
given experimental input, global fit or phenomenological convention. The override layer is
deliberately separated from the distributed defaults so that scans can be reproduced by
archiving only the user-provided YAML files and the LHA input.
Model-specific parameters are supplied through LHA, SLHA or FLHA files [10–12].
These files are loaded after the JSON defaults and YAML overrides; entries found in the
LHA-family input therefore have the highest priority for overlapping quantities.
3
Database
•
Default files (.json)
•
Input files (.yaml)
•
Lha input (.lha)
MartyInterface
•
Wilson templates
Core
•
SM parameters
•
BSM parameters
•
QCD inputs
•
Flavour inputs
•
Wilson parameters
PhysicalModel
•
Wilson coefficient 
matching
•
Wilson coefficient running
ExternalIntegration
•
2HDMC (THDM spectrum)
•
SoftSusy (SUSY spectrum)
BusinessLogic
•
Observable calculations
Common

Logger

Special types

Enum, EnumMappers
Math
•
Special functions
•
Helper function 
(Wilson/observable 
calculations)
𝐶௜(𝜇ௐ)/C୧(𝜇)
SM/BSM
parameters
𝐶௜𝜇ௐat LO
Inputs
Model’s 
spectrum
Flavour parameters
QCD inputs
C୧(𝜇)
Statistic
•
Uncertainty calculations
•
Model fitting (𝜒ଶ, etc.)
Figure 2: Data flow in the HyperIso software.
4
Program description
HyperIso is a modular software tool designed for the computation of Wilson coefficients,
flavour observables and statistical analyses. Its architecture is built around a C++ core and
applies the SOLID object-oriented design principles [14,15], with several user-facing layers
built on top of the same internal calculation pipeline.
The program supports four complementary interfaces:
• C++ interface. The native interface gives direct access to the core and is intended
for developers or users who want to write custom main programs, implement new
observables, or integrate HyperIso into a larger compiled workflow.
• Python interface. The C++ core is exposed to Python through pybind11. This inter-
face is intended for scripted scans, notebooks, automated comparisons and integration
with Python-based phenomenological workflows.
• Command-line interface. A command-line layer is provided for simple calculations
and quick checks, without writing a dedicated C++ or Python driver.
• Graphical interface. The GUI is based on Dash and targets interactive use. It gives
access to Wilson-coefficient calculations, observable predictions, uncertainty estimates,
4
Monte-Carlo uncertainty propagation, maximum-likelihood fits, confidence contours
and parameter-space exploration.
All interfaces rely on the same initialisation pattern: a HyperisoMaster object is created
and initialised with a runtime configuration and an LHA-family input file. The object
must remain alive while the dependent Wilson, observable and statistical interfaces are in
use. Packaged assets and user path overrides are resolved through the active runtime path
provider installed by HyperisoMaster; installed Python wheels therefore do not depend on
paths from the machine or container on which they were compiled. This guarantees that all
frontends use the same parameter-loading rules, Wilson-coefficient pipeline and observable
calculators.
5
Input structure and data conventions
The numerical inputs of HyperIso are stored in typed parameter blocks. Whenever possible,
block names and integer identifiers follow the FLHA convention; additional non-FLHA
blocks use the same block–identifier logic with project-defined IDs. The full catalogue of
default blocks and custom identifiers is given in A. At runtime, the same block database is
shared by the C++, Python, CLI and graphical interfaces.
The input system is deliberately layered. Distributed JSON files define the reference
database used by a clean installation.
User YAML files may override selected entries,
including their central value and uncertainty metadata. Finally, the LHA/SLHA/FLHA
spectrum file passed to HyperisoMaster::init(...) is used as the model-specific numerical
input. This last layer has the highest priority for overlapping entries, but LHA-family files
provide only the numerical value read from the spectrum block; they do not carry the
separate statistical and systematic uncertainty fields used by the internal database. The
resulting precedence rule is summarised in Fig. 3.
1. JSON defaults
Assets/default
central value + uncertainties
2. YAML overrides
user input files
central value and/or uncertainties
3. LHA/SLHA/FLHA
spectrum input
central value only
Runtime parameter cache
single value used by Wilson, observable and statistic modules
used if no
override exists
overridden by
spectrum entry
Figure 3: Input precedence in HyperIso. JSON files provide the distributed reference
database. YAML files document user-level changes, including uncertainty metadata. LHA-
family files provide the final model-dependent central values and override matching entries
in the runtime cache.
The JSON layer is version controlled with the code rather than edited for each scan. A
typical entry stores the central value and the uncertainty fields used by the statistical layer:
5
1 {
2
"SMINPUTS": {
3
"6": {
4
"central_value": 172.69,
5
"stat_error": 0.30,
6
"syst_error": 0.40
7
}
8
}
9 }
A YAML override has the same logical structure but is supplied by the user. It is
therefore a compact way of recording an alternative input convention without modifying the
distributed defaults:
1 SMINPUTS:
2
6:
3
central_value: 171.5
4
stat_error: 1.0
5
syst_error: 0.0
The corresponding value in a spectrum file follows the LHA-family syntax and overrides
the runtime central value when the same block and identifier are present:
1 Block SMINPUTS
2
6
1.71500000E+02
# m_t
In this case, the LHA value becomes the active top-quark mass in the cache. The
uncertainty metadata remains controlled by the JSON/YAML database and by the statistical
configuration.
YAML files are therefore best suited for non-LHA quantities, nuisance
parameters, uncertainty models or explicit studies of alternative conventions. LHA, SLHA
and FLHA files are best suited for model-specific spectra and Wilson-coefficient inputs.
For BSM models, the LHA parser can be extended before initialisation through the
pre_init interface of HyperisoMaster. This is useful when a model introduces spectrum
blocks that are not part of the standard LHA/SLHA/FLHA prototypes. The relevant call is
1 HyperisoMaster hyp;
2 hyp.pre_init_add_block("SPECIAL_BLOCK",
3
2,
// itemCount
4
1,
// valueIdx
5
-1,
// scaleIdx
6
-1,
// rgIdx
7
-1,
// binIdx
8
false); // globalScale
9 hyp.init("model_input.flha", config);
6
The same method is exposed in Python as pre_init_add_block. Its arguments describe
how a line of the custom block is mapped to an internal parameter entry; they are summarised
in Table 1. The column indices are zero-based, consistent with the internal Prototype
representation. The method should be called before init(), so that the first spectrum
parsing already uses the custom prototype.
Argument
Default
Meaning
blockName
–
Case-insensitive name of the custom LHA block.
itemCount
2
Total number of tokens expected on each data line of the
block.
valueIdx
1
Zero-based column index containing the numerical value
to store.
scaleIdx
-1
Optional zero-based column index for a local scale; -1
means that no per-entry scale is present.
rgIdx
-1
Optional zero-based column index for a renormalisation
or scheme identifier.
binIdx
-1
Optional zero-based column index for binned entries; the
parser uses it to encode bin information in the internal
identifier.
globalScale
false
Set to true when the block uses a global Q= scale in the
block header.
Table 1: Arguments of the custom-block registration routine. They define the LHA prototype
used by the parser for BSM-specific blocks.
Paths to external tools and writable runtime directories can also be registered before
initialisation. The method pre_init_set_marty_path selects an existing MARTY installation,
while pre_init_set_softsusy_path selects a SOFTSUSY executable or installation directory.
The lower-level pre_init_set_paths routine overrides selected internal paths, such as the
MARTY and spectrum-cache directories. The active LHA path is intentionally excluded
from this routine because it is supplied explicitly to init() or to the LHA-switching routine.
5.1
FLHA conventions for observables
We expand the FLHA convention [12] in order to account for the observables exposed
by the public HyperIso interfaces. For binned observables, six additional integer fields
encode the optional lower and upper bounds of the q2 bin in GeV, with three integer fields
assigned to each edge. This avoids floating-point identifiers while keeping sub-GeV bin
definitions reproducible. We also extend the observable-type field beyond the values defined
in the original FLHA convention. The public identifiers generated by the v1.0.3 mapper are
gathered in Table 2; internal or unreleased observable identifiers are intentionally omitted.
7
Type ID
Observable type generated by the public v1.0.3 mapper
15
Untagged branching fraction.
50
Zero crossing of AF B.
51, 52, 53
Lepton-side, hadron-side and mixed forward–backward asymmetries Aℓ
F B, Ah
F B
and Aℓh
F B.
91ij
Lepton-universality or charged-current ratio Rij
M; the current mapper emits the
concrete values 9121 and 9132.
92ij
Polarisation, where i = 1 denotes a fermion (lepton), i = 2 a longitudinally
polarised vector and i = 3 a transversely polarised vector; j is the one-based
position of the particle of interest in the ordered daughter list.
931
Longitudinal polarisation fraction FL.
932
Transverse fraction FT .
933
Angular coefficient αK.
934
Flat term FH.
941i, 942, 943i
Transverse asymmetries A(i)
T , AIm and H(i)
T .
951i, 952i, 953i
Angular observables Pi, P ′
i and Si; multi-index variants are used for S1c, S2s,
S2c and S6c.
Table 2: Additional FLHA observable-type identifiers exposed by the public HyperIso
v1.0.3 mapper. For CP-asymmetric angular counterparts, the mapper uses the negative of
the corresponding positive type code. Polarisation observables follow the project-defined
92ij convention.
For example, the τ in B →D(∗)τν is the second daughter and therefore uses type 9212,
while the longitudinally polarised D∗in B →D∗τν is the first daughter and uses type 9221.
6
User guide and interfaces
The public interfaces of HyperIso are designed as lightweight frontends to the same cal-
culation backend. They differ in the degree of interactivity and in the amount of control
exposed to the user, but they all rely on the same initialisation step: a HyperisoMaster
object is created, an LHA input file is loaded, and a HyperisoConfig object fixes the model
and runtime flags. This common entry point is important for reproducibility, since Wilson
coefficients, observables and statistical routines then use the same parameter cache and the
same precedence rules for default JSON values, YAML overrides and LHA inputs.
6.1
Overview of the user interfaces
The four user-facing layers are summarised in Table 3. The command-line interface is
intended for stable built-in workflows, whereas the Python and C++ interfaces expose the
programmable API. In particular, custom decays, custom observables and dynamic Wilson
groups are treated as API examples rather than as command-line primitives.
8
Interface
Typical use
Representative distributed examples
C++ API
Native compiled workflows, inte-
gration in external C++ scans,
development of custom observ-
ables or Wilson groups.
examples_cpp/Core
examples_cpp/Wilson
examples_cpp/Observable
examples_cpp/Statistic
Python API
Interactive and scripted phe-
nomenological analyses, note-
books, scans, post-processing
and quick validation.
examples_python/Core
examples_python/Wilson
examples_python/Observable
examples_python/Statistic
CLI
Reproducible built-in summaries
of Wilson coefficients, observ-
ables and statistical uncertain-
ties without writing a driver pro-
gram.
hyperiso-ui wilson summary
hyperiso-ui observable summary
hyperiso-ui statistic summary
Dash GUI
Interactive exploration of model
inputs, Wilson coefficients, ob-
servables, uncertainties, best-fit
routines and parameter scans.
Graphical frontend built on top of the
same Python/C++ backend.
Table 3: Main user interfaces of HyperIso and their intended use.
6.2
Common initialisation
The initialisation step is deliberately minimal. In Python, the high-level controller is imported
from pyhyperiso.Core; model and flag enums are imported from pyhyperiso.Common. The
following example initialises a Standard Model run from the reference LHA file distributed
with the code:
1 from pyhyperiso.Common import Model
2 from pyhyperiso.Core import HyperisoConfig, HyperisoMaster
3
4 config = HyperisoConfig(model=Model.SM)
5 hyp = HyperisoMaster()
6 hyp.init(lha_file="lha/si_input.flha", config=config)
The corresponding C++ entry point follows the same structure:
1 #include "HyperisoMaster.h"
2 #include "Include.h"
3
4 HyperisoConfig config;
5 config.model = Model::SM;
6
7 HyperisoMaster hyp;
8 hyp.init("lha/si_input.flha", config);
9
The same configuration object also stores runtime flags and model-backend options:
• spectrum
and
input
flags,
such
as
IS_LHA_SPECTRUM,
HAS_WILSON_INPUT
and
HAS_TH_OBSERVABLE_INPUT;
• MARTY backend flags, such as HYP_AS_SM_MARTY;
• the model choice, selected with Model.MARTY in Python or Model::MARTY in C++;
• the MARTY model name and file path, supplied through mty_model_name and
mty_model_path.
External MARTY paths and extra non-FLHA blocks can be declared before initialisation
with the pre_init routines described above. The HyperisoMaster instance must remain
alive for as long as the interfaces created from its runtime providers are used.
6.3
Python interface
The Python interface exposes the main C++ functionality through pybind11 bind-
ings and thin high-level wrappers.
The most common modules are pyhyperiso.Core,
pyhyperiso.Wilson, pyhyperiso.Observable and pyhyperiso.Statistic. They respec-
tively cover initialisation and parameter access, Wilson coefficients, physical observables,
and uncertainty propagation or fits. The following compact example combines the Wilson
and observable interfaces:
1 from pyhyperiso.Common import (
2
Model, WGroup, WCoeff, QCDOrder, ContributionType, ScaleType, WilsonBasis,
3
Observables, Decays
4 )
5 from pyhyperiso.Core import HyperisoConfig, HyperisoMaster
6 from pyhyperiso.Wilson import WilsonBuildConfig, WilsonInterface, WilsonRequest
7 from pyhyperiso.Observable import ObservableInterface
8
9 hyp = HyperisoMaster()
10 hyp.init(lha_file="lha/si_input.flha", config=HyperisoConfig(model=Model.SM))
11
12 W = WilsonInterface()
13 W.build(WilsonBuildConfig(
14
groups={WGroup.B}, matching_scale=81.0,
15
hadronic_scale=2.0, order=QCDOrder.LO))
16 req = WilsonRequest(
17
group=WGroup.B, coefficient=WCoeff.C9, order=QCDOrder.LO,
18
contribution=ContributionType.TOTAL, scale_type=ScaleType.HADRONIC,
19
wilson_basis=WilsonBasis.STANDARD)
20 print(W.get_FR(req))
21
22 O = ObservableInterface()
23 O.add_observable(Observables.BR_B_XS_GAMMA, QCDOrder.NNLO)
24 O.add_observables_from_decay(Decays.B__l_l, QCDOrder.NNLO)
25 print(O.compute_observable(Observables.BR_BS_MUMU))
10
For statistical studies, an ObservableInterface is first filled with the observables enter-
ing the fit. It is then passed to a StatisticInterface together with a StatisticConfig.
The main public methods illustrated in the examples are compute_uncertainties(),
compute_MLE(...) and compute_confidence_contour(...), respectively used for Monte-
Carlo uncertainty estimates, best fits and two-dimensional confidence regions. Experimental
data can be restricted either by experiment name or by exact measurement identifiers. An
exact identifier is represented by an ExperimentObs object containing an experiment name
and a BinnedObservableId; select_experiment_observables(...) configures this selec-
tion and selected_experiment_observables() exposes the retained entries. This prevents
unrelated measurements of the same theoretical observable from entering a fit.
6.4
C++ interface
The C++ examples are built as independent executables against an installed HyperIso pack-
age. A minimal build uses CMake and the exported targets of the library:
1 mkdir -p build
2 cd build
3 cmake ..
4 cmake --build .
The example CMake project calls find_package(Hyperiso REQUIRED) and links to the
relevant component targets, such as Hyperiso::CoreLib, Hyperiso::PhysicalModelLib,
Hyperiso::BusinessLogicLib and, when available, Hyperiso::StatisticLib. The fol-
lowing C++ fragment shows the same Wilson-coefficient workflow as above:
11
1 #include <iostream>
2 #include <unordered_set>
3
4 #include "HyperisoMaster.h"
5 #include "Include.h"
6 #include "WilsonInterface.h"
7
8 HyperisoConfig config;
9 config.model = Model::SM;
10
11 HyperisoMaster hyp;
12 hyp.init("lha/si_input.flha", config);
13
14 WilsonBuildConfig wc_config(
15
std::unordered_set<WGroup>{WGroup::B, WGroup::BScalar},
16
81.0, 2.0, QCDOrder::LO
17 );
18
19 WilsonInterface W;
20 W.build(wc_config);
21 std::cout << W.getFR(WGroup::B, WCoef::C9,
22
QCDOrder::LO, ContributionType::TOTAL) << std::endl;
Observable calculations are handled by ObservableInterface, using add_observable(...)
for individual observables, add_observables(...) for complete decays and BinnedObservableId
for binned quantities.
The statistical API mirrors the Python workflow through
StatisticConfig, StatisticInterface, compute_uncertainties(), compute_MLE(...)
and compute_confidence_contour(...).
The more development-oriented examples,
stored in dev_examples, illustrate dynamic identifiers, lambda-defined Wilson groups,
custom decays and diagnostic utilities.
6.5
Command-line interface
The command-line interface is provided by the hyperiso-ui executable. Since it is aimed
at stable built-in workflows, it focuses on three families of summaries: Wilson coefficients,
observables and statistical dependency or uncertainty estimates. The executable is enabled
with the dedicated CLI build flag,
1 cmake -S Hyperiso/Hyperiso/core -B build -DBUILD_WITH_CLI=ON
2 cmake --build build --target hyperiso-ui --parallel
and accepts the common options –model SM|THDM|MSSM|MARTY, –lha <file> and
–order LO|NLO|NNLO. For example, a compact Wilson-coefficient summary can be obtained
with
12
1 ./build/hyperiso-ui wilson summary \
2
--model SM \
3
--lha reproducibility/inputs/sm_reference.flha \
4
--groups BCoefficients \
5
--coeffs C7,C9,C10 \
6
--qmatch 81 \
7
--q 4.8 \
8
--order NNLO
while representative observable and statistics runs are
1 ./build/hyperiso-ui observable summary \
2
--model SM \
3
--lha reproducibility/inputs/sm_reference.flha \
4
--observables BR_Bs__mu_mu,BR_B__Xs_gamma \
5
--order NNLO
6
7 ./build/hyperiso-ui statistic summary \
8
--model SM \
9
--lha reproducibility/inputs/sm_reference.flha \
10
--observables BR_Bs__mu_mu,BR_B__Xs_gamma \
11
--chi2 --uncertainties --progress --draws 200 --seed 123456
Binned observables are passed through –bins using the syntax OBS:min:max, for example
F_L_B0__K*0_mu_mu:1.1:6.0. Help is available at the top level and for each command fam-
ily through hyperiso-ui –help, hyperiso-ui wilson –help, hyperiso-ui observable
–help and hyperiso-ui statistic –help.
6.6
Graphical interface
The Dash graphical interface provides a no-code route to the same workflows. It is mainly
intended for exploratory use: the user selects the model configuration and LHA input,
computes Wilson coefficients or observables, propagates uncertainties, launches MLE/Monte-
Carlo fits with a χ2 backend, and scans selected parameters. Representative screenshots
of the Wilson, observable, uncertainty and scan panels are distributed in the source-tree
examples and online API documentation, together with the corresponding CLI or Python
commands used to reproduce the same calculations.
7
Theoretical framework
Most of the theoretical calculations used in HyperIso are detailed in SuperIso documenta-
tion. In this section, we merely recall the general framework in which the observables are
calculated, and we detail the new statistical engine that is featured by HyperIso.
The computation of flavour observables is done within the weak effective field theory
in which the heavy (W, Z, h, t and any BSM particle with mass greater than or equal to
the W boson) degrees of freedom are integrated out to yield an effective Hamiltonian.
13
This Hamiltonian takes the form of a sum of effective operators with effective numerical
coefficients, called Wilson coefficients in front of them. For the b →sγ decays the relevant
effective Hamiltonian reads [16]
H(b →sX) = −4GF
√
2 VtbV ∗
ts
8
X
i=1
Ci(µ)Oi(µ) + h.c.,
(1)
while for the b →sℓℓdecays it includes semileptonic vectorial O9,10 and scalar OQ1,Q2
operators [17]. HyperIso also implements other effective Hamiltonians for charged-current
P →ℓν decays [18], where P stands for any pseudoscalar meson, as well as ∆F = 2
neutral-meson mixing operators [19] and s →dνν decays [20].
The Wilson coefficients are expanded perturbatively in the strong coupling strength,
Ci(µ) =
∞
X
j=0
αs(µ)
4π
j
C(j)
i
(µ),
(2)
where in practice this expansion is known up to j = 2. The Wilson coefficients are first
calculated at a scale µW ∼MW by matching the full and the effective theories, and ran
down to the hadronic scale µb ∼mb (for B meson decays) using the known renormalisation
group equations (RGEs) [19,21,22].
In HyperIso there are two ways to compute the Wilson coefficients. The SM, 2-HDM
and MSSM contributions are natively implemented up to NNLO as legacy from SuperIso,
and their calculation can be triggered by using the corresponding Model flag when initial-
ising HyperisoMaster. In any model, one can also use MARTY to compute the LO BSM
contribution to the Wilson coefficients. In this case, the SM contribution can either be
computed at LO using MARTY as well, or at NNLO using the analytical expressions from
SuperIso (recommended). This is triggered by using the Model::MARTY flag and the choice
of the SM values is set by the flag HYP_AS_SM_MARTY.
In the generic-model workflow, the BSM contribution is generated directly from diagrams
containing at least one non-SM particle. The total coefficient is then constructed as the sum of
this genuine BSM contribution and the SM contribution selected through HYP_AS_SM_MARTY.
This avoids defining the BSM contribution through the subtraction of two independently
evaluated SM predictions. For each coefficient, the interface first probes the tree-level
amplitude. If at least one tree-level contribution is present, the matching stops at that order;
otherwise the coefficient is evaluated at one loop. Empty tree-level amplitudes are detected
before Wilson-basis projection.
The semileptonic coefficient C9 retains a dedicated separation of photon- and non-photon-
penguin contributions required by the projection conventions used in the interface.
7.1
Observables
HyperIso natively implements the most constraining flavour observables, with particular
emphasis on the B-meson decay channels measured at current flavour facilities. It also
provides extension mechanisms for user-defined observables and effective coefficients.
The base structure encapsulating all observable calculation mechanics is called
DecayParent. This structure stores useful information such as the scale and QCD order at
14
which the observable needs to be calculated, the Wilson coefficient groups it depends on,
and it has internal methods to trigger the calculation of the appropriate Wilson coefficients.
The DecayParent class also stores a polymorphic configuration structure, which can then
be specified in derived decays to pass specific flags or attributes to the calculator. Each
physical decay is then described by a derived class from DecayParent and implements the
actual calculation of the observables related to this decay. Table 4 gives a compact overview
of the main native decay families and representative observables, while a more detailed
summary can be found in B.
Whenever a DecayParent subclass is asked to evaluate one of its observables, it first
triggers the calculation of the needed Wilson coefficients at the right low-energy scale, then
retrieves all the needed parameters from the core memory, and finally performs all the
calculations using these inputs. Whenever possible, HyperIso uses the GNU Scientific
Library (GSL) [23] in order to benefit from its optimised algorithms. In practice, most
special functions, except for the highest-order polylogarithms, and all numerical integrals
are evaluated using GSL.
Notable changes from SuperIso v5.0 include:
• Generalised P →ℓν decay calculator (see C).
• Generalised form-factor and QCD factorisation calculators for all B →V and B →P
neutral-current transitions (V denotes any vector meson such as K∗or ϕ). This allows
us to remove duplicated code by centralising common sub-calculations among similar
decays.
Sector
Native decay families
Representative outputs
Rare and radiative
B decays
B →Xsγ, B →Xsℓℓ, B →K(∗)ℓℓ,
Bs →ϕℓℓ, Λb →Λℓℓ
Branching fractions, differential rates,
forward–backward asymmetries, angu-
lar coefficients and optimised observ-
ables.
Leptonic
and
charged-current
decays
Bs,d →ℓℓ, Bu →ℓν, B →D(∗)ℓν
Leptonic
branching
fractions,
R(D(∗)), polarisation and angular
observables.
Kaon,
charm and
mixing observables
K →πν¯ν, K →πℓℓ, KL,S →µµ,
K →ℓν, D(s) →ℓν, neutral-meson
mixing
Rare-kaon branching fractions, lep-
tonic ratios, D(s) leptonic modes,
mass differences and CP phases.
Extensions
Custom decay and observable regis-
tration layer
User-defined observables attached to
native or custom decay families.
Table 4: Compact overview of the main observable sectors natively covered by HyperIso.
A more detailed decay-by-decay catalogue is given in B; the exact canonical identifiers are
distributed with the observable mapper and can be queried through the public interfaces.
15
7.2
Statistics
One of the major improvements of HyperIso is found in its completely overhauled statistical
engine. Most HEP software packages rely on Gaussian approximation and χ2 statistics for
their prediction and fitting routines. However, an increasing amount of experimental data is
available with non-Gaussian uncertainties, ranging from simple asymmetric split-Gaussian
distributions y = ¯y +σ+
−σ−to full likelihood profiles. We expect that taking a conservative
Gaussian estimate with the largest standard deviation leads to a decrease in the fit power
by overestimating some uncertainties.
The major difficulty that arises when one wants to take into account non-Gaussian
distributions is dealing with correlations properly. Indeed, correlation matrices given by
experimental fits are calculated under the Gaussian approximation, and only describe joint
multivariate-normal distributions. If one wants to consider different marginal distributions
for the individual components, one has to also change the way correlations are described. In
HyperIso, this is achieved using copulas, which are mathematical tools which allow us to
decouple the marginal distributions from the correlation structure of a random vector.
Mathematically speaking, a copula C is a joint cumulative distribution function (CDF)
of a d-dimensional random vector on [0, 1]d with uniform U(0, 1) marginals. These objects
can be used to describe any multivariate probability distribution, as stated by Sklar’s
theorem [24]:
Theorem (Sklar) Let X = (X1, . . . , Xd) ∈Rd be a random vector with joint CDF
F(x) = P(X1 ≤x1, . . . , Xd ≤xd) and marginal CDFs Fi(xi) = P(Xi ≤xi). There exists a
copula C : [0, 1]d →[0, 1] such that:
F(x) = C(F1(x1), . . . , Fd(xd)).
(3)
If the marginal CDFs are continuous, then the copula C is unique. Assuming the existence
of the derivatives, the joint probability density function (PDF) h(x) of X reads:
h(x) = ∂1 . . . ∂dC(F1(x1), . . . , Fd(xd))
d
Y
i=1
F ′
i(xi).
(4)
Using copulas, we will then be able to choose independently the marginal distributions
of our input variables and their correlation structure. In practice, as experimental input
correlation is often given in the form of a correlation matrix with an underlying Gaussian
assumption, we will use a Gaussian copula to model the correlation. The Gaussian copula
has the following form, given a d-dimensional positive definite correlation matrix R:
C(u) = Φd(Φ−1(u1), . . . , Φ−1(ud)),
(5)
where Φd is the joint CDF of a multivariate normal distribution with mean vector 0 and
covariance matrix R, and Φ−1 is the quantile function of the standard normal distribution.
7.2.1
Inputs
In order to perform its statistical evaluations, HyperIso takes the following inputs:
1. The experimental measurements of the implemented observables, separated in a
vector of expected values Oexp. and an experimental covariance matrix ΣO (Gaussian
assumption),
16
2. The central values η0 and covariance matrix Ση of the nuisance parameters if they
are Gaussian, else the marginal distribution of each nuisance parameter which can be
either Gaussian, split-Gaussian or flat.
The statistical distributions of both the nuisance parameters and the experimental observables
are modelled using copulas taking into account the different marginal distributions and the
global covariance of the parameters. This allows us to relax the Gaussian assumption while
still modelling the correlations accurately. The central values and standard deviations of the
experimental observables are stored in the observables.json asset file which should be
overridden by adding entries in the observables.yaml file. Similarly, the correlations among
experimental observable values are stored in the observables_corr, and the correlation
among input parameters in the parameters_corr files.
7.2.2
Observable prediction
Given a set of model/fit parameters p, HyperIso uses a Monte-Carlo sampling of the nuisance
parameter distributions to evaluate the distribution of model predictions. HyperIso then
computes the skewness of each marginal distribution corresponding to the various observables,
and decides whether it can be assumed to be Gaussian or not. If the skewness is below a
user-defined threshold, set by the skew_abs_threshold parameter in the StatisticConfig,
a Gaussian approximation is made and the prediction for a given observable is:
Oth = µ ± s,
(6)
where µ is the population mean of the distribution and s is the unbiased population standard
deviation. If the skewness is above the threshold, then the result is returned in the form of
a split-Gaussian distribution
Oth = m+σ+
−σ−,
(7)
with mode m, and asymmetric standard deviations (σ−, σ+).
This calculation is launched by the compute_uncertainties() method of the
StatisticInterface once the latter has been fully initialised with the desired observables.
The number of Monte-Carlo samples is configured through StatisticConfig::MC_draws.
Empirically, a value of 500 to 1000 samples has been found to yield stable estimates for the
observable uncertainties, while as few as 50 samples provide a reliable central value and a
rough estimate of the uncertainty.
7.2.3
Model fitting
Another use case of HyperIso
is to perform a maximum-likelihood fit for some set of
parameters p (which can be model parameters, form factors, Wilson coefficients. . . ), given a
set of nuisance parameters η with known statistical distribution. Such a fit is a solution to
the constrained optimisation problem:
(ˆp, ˆη) = argmin
p,η
ℓ(p, η).
(8)
where ℓis a negative-log-likelihood function on the predicted values for the observables
incorporating the constraint that the nuisance parameters η cannot vary significantly outside
17
of their confidence regions. In HyperIso , we model our theoretical predictions by a function
f(p, η), and we define the log-likelihood function:
ℓ(p, η) = ℓO(p, η) + ℓη(η),
(9)
where the first term corresponds to the log-likelihood of our prediction for the observables and
the second term is a penalisation term that blows up whenever the nuisance parameters take
values outside of their confidence intervals. The prediction likelihood is modelled as a joint
copula distribution of the residues r(p, η) = f(p, η) −Oexp, and the nuisance penalisation
likelihood is modelled as a separate copula distribution of the nuisances themselves, hence
peaked at the central values of each.
Then we implemented two distinct algorithms to manage the nuisance term and reduce
the likelihood to a function ˜ℓ(p) of the fit parameters only. The first one consists in profiling
the general likelihood over the nuisances to find the best available combination of values for
the nuisance parameters for a given set of fit parameters p:
˜ℓ(p) = min
η
ℓ(p, η).
(10)
The second one consists in marginalising the nuisance parameters by computing the (Gaus-
sian) covariance matrix Σth of the model prediction vector in the SM2, adding it to the
covariance matrix of the experimental data that is used to define the copula entering the
expression of ℓO:
˜ℓ(p) = ℓO(p, η0)

Σ=Σexp+Σth
.
(11)
Compared with the legacy SuperIso approximation, where theory uncertainties were es-
timated from a first-order Taylor expansion of each observable, this mode keeps the full
configured nuisance distributions at the sampling stage and only makes a Gaussian approx-
imation at the level of the induced observable covariance. It is therefore well suited for
global scans and graphical-interface best-fit studies: the expensive nuisance propagation is
amortised in the covariance construction, and the subsequent minimisation involves only the
parameters of interest. It is complementary to the profiled-nuisance likelihood described
above, which retains a more explicitly frequentist interpretation but is more expensive when
the number of nuisance parameters is large.
We use MINUIT2 [25] to perform the minimisation of the log-likelihood and find the
best fit point ˆp along with the full covariance matrix around ˆp. Then, one can compute
a 2-dimensional confidence contour for a given z value.
For this, we make use of the
Wilks approximation, stating that near the best fit point the likelihood behaves like a χ2
distribution, and we define the confidence contour as the set of points in 2-d space such that:
∆ℓ(p1, p2) = ¯ℓ(p1, p2) −ℓ(ˆp) = ∆χ2
n(z),
(12)
where ¯ℓ(p1, p2) is a new log-likelihood function in which all fit parameters p⊥orthogonal
to the (p1, p2) plane have been integrated in some way, and ∆χ2
n(z) is the n-degrees of
freedom chi-squared variation corresponding to a zσ deviation from the best fit value. In
HyperIso we implemented three ways of integrating the orthogonal parameters:
2Deviation of the model covariance from the SM has been tested to be small.
18
1. SLICE: The orthogonal parameters are fixed to their best-fit value, i.e. ¯ℓ(p1, p2) =
ℓ(p1, p2, ˆp⊥).
2. FREE_PROJECTION: The likelihood is profiled over the orthogonal parameters which
are let completely free, i.e. ¯ℓ(p1, p2) = minp⊥ℓ(p1, p2, p⊥).
3. PRIOR_CONSTRAINED_PROJECTION: The likelihood is profiled over the orthogonal param-
eters which are constrained by a gaussian distribution built using the best fit informa-
tion, i.e. ¯ℓ(p1, p2) = minp⊥[ℓ(p1, p2, p⊥) + ℓ⊥(p⊥)] and ℓ⊥(p⊥) = (p⊥−ˆp⊥)T Σ⊥(p⊥−
ˆp⊥).
Another usual way of dealing with the orthogonal fit parameters is to fix them to their SM
value, but this amounts to performing a 2-d fit only on (p1, p2) in the first place, therefore it
is not implemented separately in HyperIso.
There are two contouring algorithms implemented in HyperIso: the first one uses the
already existing algorithm in MINUIT2 and the second one is an adaptive marching squares
(AMS) algorithm. Although MINUIT2’s algorithm is usually faster, it is targeted at ellipsoidal
contours around best-fit points which are not too far from the quadratic approximation. On
the other hand, the general-purpose AMS algorithm is usually slower but works well for any
contour topology.
We demonstrate in Fig. 4 the result of these three projections. We performed a 4-
dimensional fit of new physics contributions δC9, δC10, δCQ1, δCQ2 to the CMS measurements
of the angular distributions of the B0 →K∗0µ+µ−decay [26]. The best fit point in 4-d
space is found to be coherent with [27]. As expected, the slice method yields the smallest
confidence contour, while the unconstrained profiling yields the largest. The constrained
profiling is theoretically bound to sit between the other two, and will be closer to the slice
contour the smaller the fit uncertainty is. Interestingly, the enlargement on this particular
fit is only found in the right-handed C9 + C10 direction, while no enlargement is found in the
orthogonal left-handed C9 −C10 direction, reflecting the relative steepness of the likelihood
in the two directions.
In the public API, this workflow is exposed by registering the selected observables in
an ObservableInterface and passing it to the statistical layer together with the nuisance
configuration. The same observable vector can then be used for a central-value prediction, a
Monte-Carlo theory covariance estimate, or a full profiled-likelihood calculation. This avoids
duplicating observable definitions between prediction and fitting workflows.
7.3
Calculation workflow
The calculation workflow in HyperIso is modular. Short-distance effects are encoded in
Wilson coefficients, as introduced in Section 6 and in the effective-Hamiltonian examples
above. The PhysicalModel layer manages the model-dependent short-distance part, while
the BusinessLogic layer implements decay-specific long-distance quantities, observable
projections and numerical integrations. A typical computation therefore follows three steps:
first the Wilson coefficients are computed or imported at the matching scale; second, the
requested coefficients are evolved to the scale used by the decay calculator; third, observables
and statistical quantities are evaluated from the shared runtime parameter database.
19
Figure 4: Effect of the three projection methods on the (δC9, δC10) 1σ confidence contour
from a four-dimensional fit including the scalar operators CQ1, CQ2 to CMS measurements
of the angular distributions of the B0 →K∗0µ+µ−decay.
This framework accommodates both established scenarios, such as the SM, THDM and
SUSY models implemented natively, and new BSM models interfaced through MARTY at
leading order. In all cases, the observable and statistical layers receive the same coefficient
objects, which keeps validation and interface behaviour independent of the origin of the
short-distance input.
8
Validation and benchmarks
The validation of HyperIso has two main goals: to compare the native hard-coded calcula-
tions with SuperIso for the common SM, THDM and SUSY benchmarks, and to compare
the native route with the MARTY-based route on models available in both workflows.
8.1
Validation of SuperIso legacy
In order to validate the new HyperIso framework, we first compared the hard-coded
calculations with SuperIso for the models available in the legacy code. Since the model
dependence enters primarily through the short-distance coefficients, the first validation
step is a direct comparison of Wilson coefficients at the matching scale. The long-distance
observables are then checked separately in the SM, where the calculation is faster and the
observable implementation is model independent once the Wilson coefficients are fixed.
Table 5 shows the comparison for the standard B-sector coefficients. The SM, THDM and
SUSY benchmarks are displayed as stacked blocks rather than parallel column groups, which
keeps the numerical entries readable while preserving the same information. The full set of
20
coefficients used in the validation, including scalar and primed operators, is reported in D. The
relative differences remain below the per-mille level in the displayed benchmark, confirming
that the native HyperIso implementation reproduces the corresponding SuperIso short-
distance calculation. Additional comparisons were performed after QCD running to the
low-energy scale and showed agreement with SuperIso within numerical precision.
coefs
SI
HI
%
µW = O(MW )
SM
C1
0.158 396 345 3
0.158 396 345 1
0
C2
1.001 843 983
1.001 843 983
0
C3
−0.000 293 168 778 2
−0.000 293 168 778 2
0
C4
−0.003 248 811 761
−0.003 247 432 028
0.042 478
C5
3.386 474 459 × 10−5
3.386 879 571 × 10−5
0.011 962
C6
6.349 639 566 × 10−5
6.349 639 566 × 10−5
0
C7
−0.210 742 753 6
−0.210 677 423 2
0.031 005
C8
−0.115 116 720 2
−0.115 091 555 1
0.021 863
C9
1.930 302 269
1.929 625 99
0.035 041
C10
−4.171 695 742
−4.168 626 236
0.073 606
THDM
C1
0
0
0
C2
0
0
0
C3
−3.723 792 155 × 10−8
−3.723 792 155 × 10−8
0
C4
9.296 889 404 × 10−6
9.296 896 376 × 10−6
0.000 075
C5
1.400 574 929 × 10−8
1.400 577 667 × 10−8
0.000 195
C6
2.626 083 695 × 10−8
2.626 083 695 × 10−8
0
C7
0.000 800 787 454 6
0.000 800 478 691 8
0.038 565
C8
0.000 870 486 678 4
0.000 870 486 466 6
0.000 024
C9
−0.000 277 855 314 1
−0.000 277 854 454 5
0.000 309
C10
−0.004 887 954 445
−0.004 887 955 214
0.000 016
SUSY
C1
−5.594 240 306 × 10−7
−5.594 240 306 × 10−7
0
C2
0
0
0
C3
4.934 433 6 × 10−7
4.934 424 585 × 10−7
0.000 183
C4
4.003 675 142 × 10−6
4.003 666 186 × 10−6
0.000 224
C5
−4.444 685 28 × 10−8
−4.444 694 295 × 10−8
0.000 203
C6
−8.333 807 436 × 10−8
−8.333 798 422 × 10−8
0.000 108
C7
0.000 845 549 310 7
0.000 845 147 937 2
0.047 480
C8
−0.010 110 815 2
−0.010 110 883
0.000 671
C9
0.005 880 995 78
0.005 879 457 677
0.026 157
C10
0.005 718 707 991
0.005 718 690 65
0.000 303
Table 5: Comparison between SuperIso (SI) and HyperIso (HI) for the standard B-sector
Wilson coefficients at matching scale. The three benchmark models are displayed in stacked
blocks to improve readability. The complete table, including scalar and primed coefficients,
is given in D.
21
Figure 5: Comparison between SuperIso and HyperIso for some B →K∗µµ angular
observables.
We compared the Wilson coefficients in all the models common to SuperIso and
HyperIso, namely the SM, THDM and SUSY benchmarks, using identical input parameters.
This establishes the consistency of the native HyperIso implementation for the hard-coded
legacy scenarios.
We next compared the long-distance implementation. This being model independent,
we only made the comparison in the SM. An example is given in Fig. 5 for the angular
observables FL and P ′
5 of the B →K∗µµ semileptonic decay as a function of the transferred
momentum q2. Excellent agreement is found for the central value and the uncertainty
bands. This validates both the implementation of the observables in HyperIso and the
linear approximation made in SuperIso for the estimation of uncertainties.
Finally, we tested the fitting and contouring features of HyperIso. We reproduced
the model-independent new physics fits of δC9, δC10 to angular observables of the B0 →
K∗0µ+µ−decay of [27] using the experimental data from both CMS [26] and the 2025
update of LHCb [28]. We used the theoretical covariance based likelihood function. The
results are shown in Fig. 6 and are in remarkable agreement with SuperIso both regarding
the best-fit point and the confidence contours. It should also be noted that producing such
results is very quick in HyperIso compared to SuperIso. The plot in Fig. 6 was produced
in approximately 5 minutes on 30 threads, using 1500 Monte-Carlo draws for the calculation
of the theory covariance and a contour resolution of 100.
8.2
Validation of the MARTY interface
The second validation step is internal to HyperIso and tests the agreement between the
native hard-coded Wilson-coefficient implementation and the generic MARTY-based route.
We perform this comparison on the SM and on a type-II THDM benchmark, using the
same LHA input and the same normalisation conventions. The comparison is made at the
matching scale, where the Wilson coefficients are produced either by the native analytical
implementation or by the MARTY workflow. This is the relevant scale for validating the
interface itself: after matching, the QCD evolution to the hadronic scale is performed by
the same HyperIso running code in both workflows. The running part has already been
validated against SuperIso in the previous subsection.
22
Figure 6: Model-independent C9, C10 fit to angular B0 →K∗0µ+µ−observables, using the
measurements from CMS [26] and LHCb [28].
The present MARTY interface is used for the leading-order calculation. We therefore
restrict the direct native–MARTY comparison to LO coefficients. Higher-order QCD cor-
rections are not generated by MARTY in this workflow; they are instead part of the native
HyperIso implementation and of the common QCD-running stage. In Table 6 (and in
the extended Tables 33 and 34), we show only coefficients that are non-zero in at least
one of the compared SM or type-II THDM BSM entries, after removing entries that are
redundant for the displayed benchmark. In particular, the printed tables keep the muonic
scalar coefficients but omit the electron and tau scalar entries, and they do not list the
full set of C′
Q coefficients. This keeps the comparison focused on the operators used in the
reference phenomenological channels while the complete machine-readable export is kept in
the validation files.
For the MARTY route, the displayed BSM entries are obtained from the diagrammatically
selected non-SM contribution. They are not constructed by subtracting a separately evaluated
SM coefficient from a full-model result. The total coefficient is obtained by adding the selected
SM and genuine BSM components. It is important to note that the MARTY-based route used
here should not be interpreted as a one-to-one implementation of the dedicated matching
procedure employed in HyperIso or in SuperIso. In the current interface, MARTY generates
amplitudes which are then projected directly onto the effective-operator basis used by
HyperIso. This direct projection is sufficient to validate the normalisation, basis conventions
and the generic-model data flow, but it is not yet equivalent to a dedicated EFT matching
calculation with all the convention-dependent rearrangements, projections and operator
reductions implemented at the same level as in the native code. Consequently, small but
visible differences can appear for some coefficients, especially in sectors where the projection
23
Coefficient
SM
THDM type-II BSM
HI
MARTY
δrel
HI
MARTY
δrel
µW = O(MW ), matching scale, LO
C2
1
1.000 064
6.4 × 10−5
0
0
–
C7
−0.194 114 75
−0.194 208 7
0.000 484
−0.099 068 547
−0.099 057 4
0.000 113
C8
−0.096 902 814
−0.096 975 58
0.000 751
−0.099 275 045
−0.099 258 82
0.000 163
C9
2.007 624 8
2.007 624 8
0
0.000 124 062 79 0.000 122 847 7
0.009 79
C10
−4.463 736 1
−4.479 714 + 0.088 600 65 i
0.0202
−0.006 580 194 5 −0.006 560 991
0.002 92
Table 6: Native-HyperIso/MARTY comparison for the non-zero standard B-sector Wilson
coefficients at matching scale. Only the SM and genuine type-II THDM contributions are
displayed, since the total THDM coefficient is obtained by their sum. The last column in
each block gives the relative difference defined in Eq. (13). The complete displayed table is
given in D.
is numerically sensitive or where scalar and primed structures are involved. A dedicated
matching layer in MARTY is under development; once available, it is expected to provide a
closer analogue of the native HyperIso/SuperIso matching workflow and may be included
in a future release.
Table 6 summarises the numerical comparison for the non-zero standard B-sector co-
efficients. The complete set of displayed matching-scale entries, including the selected
primed and scalar operators, is reported in D. For each coefficient, we display only the SM
contribution and the genuine type-II THDM contribution. The total THDM coefficient is
not shown as an independent column because it is obtained by summing the two displayed
contributions. We report the relative difference
δrel(Ci) =
CHI
i
−CMARTY
i

CHI
i

,
(13)
whenever the native coefficient is non-zero; a dash denotes entries for which this normalisation
is not defined. An interesting feature is the appearance of nonzero, yet small imaginary
parts in MARTY’s calculation. The reason for this is twofold: first, exact CKM unitarity is
not enforced numerically as we rely on the Wolfenstein parameterisation, and second, the
light quark masses (c and u) are not set to zero but rather kept at their physical value in
the MS renormalisation scheme, leading to very good yet not exact GIM cancellation, and
the appearance of nonzero imaginary parts as a distinctive feature of this approximation
being relaxed.
For MARTY-backed evaluations, each numerical evaluation also receives a private runtime
directory containing its parameter input and Wilson-coefficient output files. Generated
sources, libraries and numerical executables remain shared read-only cache artefacts. Their
generation or invalidation is serialised, while already compiled numerical evaluations can
run concurrently. The per-evaluation runtime directory is removed after its output has been
consumed.
24
9
Performance and scaling
Unless otherwise stated, the benchmarks use HyperIso v1.0.3 (commit 09d26ac6e71d), a
GCC 14.3.0 Release build (-O3 -DNDEBUG) configured with CMake 3.28.3, on an Intel Core
i9-14900K under Ubuntu 24.04.4 LTS on WSL2. The environment exposed 32 logical CPUs
and 31 GiB of RAM (x86_64; Linux kernel 6.18.33.1-microsoft-standard-WSL2). The
requested thread count and the number of timed repetitions are reported for each benchmark.
The computational cost of HyperIso is not uniform across the available observables.
Wilson coefficients are evaluated once for a chosen model, perturbative order and scale
configuration, whereas the long-distance part is organised by decay channel and may involve
bin-by-bin integrations, form-factor evaluations, QCD factorisation terms and angular
projections. For a selected set S of observables grouped into decay families d, the wall time
of a call to ObservableInterface::compute_all() may be schematically written as:
Tobs(S) ≃TWC +
X
d
h
T (d)
cache + N(d)
binN(d)
q
C(d)
amp + N(d)
obsC(d)
proj
i
,
(14)
where TWC is the Wilson-coefficient setup cost, T (d)
cache denotes decay-specific cached quantities,
N(d)
bin is the number of selected q2 bins, N(d)
q
is the effective number of quadrature points
per bin, C(d)
amp is the cost of evaluating the amplitudes or form-factor combinations entering
the integrand, and C(d)
proj is the comparatively small cost of projecting the cached angular
coefficients onto the requested observables. This separation is useful in practice because
most of the speed-critical work is decay-local: once a decay cache has been filled, many
observables can be extracted from the same intermediate quantities.
This hierarchy is visible in the per-decay benchmark shown in Fig. 7. Each entry reports
the mean time of one compute_all() call at NLO over 30 timed repetitions after warm-up
calls, using the same input point. The horizontal axis is logarithmic because the dynamic
range is very large: the fastest leptonic modes are below the millisecond scale, whereas
the most expensive binned semileptonic modes can require seconds to tens of seconds.
The dominant entries are the angular decays with many binned observables, in particular
B →K∗ℓℓand Bs →ϕℓℓ. The former contains 350 observable entries in this benchmark
and is more than four orders of magnitude slower than the simplest leptonic channels, even
after using the threaded implementation. This behaviour is expected from Eq. (14): the cost
is driven not only by the number of published observables but also by the shared amplitude
and QCD-factorisation evaluations needed for each bin.
The largest gains are therefore obtained by optimising the heavy decay caches rather than
the lightweight observable projections. In the B →K∗ℓℓimplementation, the binned angular
observables are expressed through a common set of angular coefficients Ji. These coefficients
are integrated in a single pass per bin and per CP conjugation using a fixed Gauss–Legendre
rule. At each quadrature point the transversity amplitudes are evaluated once, and the set of
Ji combinations is accumulated simultaneously. This avoids the repeated-integral pattern in
which many observables would independently re-evaluate the same amplitudes. In addition,
the expensive QCD-factorisation lookup tables entering the amplitudes are filled in parallel.
The lookup grid is split into contiguous chunks over worker threads; each worker owns local
form-factor and QCD-factorisation calculator instances and writes to disjoint cache entries.
Apart from exception collection, the inner loop is therefore lock-free. For a lookup size
25
10
1
100
101
102
103
104
Mean execution time [ms]
B
D
B
+
K
Ds
K
K
+
B
Xs
B
D
B
D*
b
+
B
Xs
+
B
K*
B
K
+
Bs
+
B
K*
+
nobs = 2
nobs = 1
nobs = 6
nobs = 2
nobs = 2
nobs = 2
nobs = 2
nobs = 1
nobs = 8
nobs = 10
nobs = 21
nobs = 6
nobs = 4
nobs = 26
nobs = 73
nobs = 350
Figure
7:
Per-decay
benchmark
of
the
mean
wall
time
of
ObservableInterface::compute_all()
at
NLO.
The
benchmark
uses
30
timed
repetitions after warm-up calls and displays the number of observable entries associated
with each decay family. Since all channels are measured on the same setup, the figure is
intended primarily as a relative cost comparison; absolute timings depend on the compiler,
CPU and runtime configuration.
Nlookup and nt worker threads, the cache-filling contribution scales approximately as:
T B→K∗ℓℓ
cache
(nt) ≃
NlookupCQCDf
min(nt, Nlookup) + Tlaunch + Tmemory,
(15)
up to load imbalance, thread-launch overhead and memory-bandwidth effects. The number
of threads allocated to this parallelisation step can be set in the individual DecayConfig
structures of the relevant decays.
Figure 8 shows the corresponding thread-scaling study for a representative binned
semileptonic benchmark. The one-thread runtime is about 3.79 s per compute_all() call.
Increasing the number of worker threads gives a rapid reduction at small thread counts,
26
5
10
15
20
25
30
Threads
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Mean execution time [ms]
B
K
+
 (26 observables)
5
10
15
20
25
30
Threads
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Speedup S(N) = T(1)/T(N)
Scaling
Ideal
Measured
Figure 8: Thread-scaling benchmark for a binned semileptonic compute_all() workload
at NLO. The left panel shows the mean wall time per call as a function of the requested
number of threads. The right panel shows the measured speedup relative to one thread and
the ideal linear behaviour. The saturation beyond approximately 15–20 threads indicates
the transition from amplitude/QCD-factorisation dominated work to serial overheads and
memory effects.
reaching a speedup of about 4.2 at 8 threads and about 5.4 at 20 threads for B →K∗ℓ+ℓ−,
and maximum 4 at 10 threads for B →Kℓ+ℓ−. The best point in the supplied scan is
around 25 threads, with a mean time of about 0.64 s, corresponding to a speedup close
to 6. Beyond roughly 15–20 threads the curve flattens: the remaining serial work, cache
construction outside the parallel region, memory traffic and thread scheduling overhead
dominate over the parallel QCD-factorisation work. The measured curve is therefore far
from ideal linear scaling at large nt, but the reduction by a factor of five to six is sufficient
to make binned scans and repeated fits substantially more practical.
The same considerations determine the cost of statistical analyses. In the χ2 backend
based on a Monte-Carlo theory covariance, the nuisance parameters are sampled once to
construct the Monte-Carlo theory covariance, after which the fit itself is performed in the
lower-dimensional space of the parameters of interest. If D observables enter the fit, NMC
accepted nuisance samples are used for the covariance estimate, and Neval model evaluations
are required by the minimiser, the leading cost is:
Tχ2 ≃NMC Tpred(D) + O(NMCD2) + O(D3) + Neval Tpred(D),
(16)
where Tpred(D) is the time needed to evaluate the selected observable vector. The second
term is the empirical covariance construction, the third is the inversion of the total covariance
matrix, and the last term is the deterministic minimisation. The memory usage is O(NMCD+
D2) when all accepted samples are kept for diagnostics or written to CSV. Consequently,
for global fits involving expensive binned observables, the dominant scaling variable is often
the cost of repeated observable prediction rather than the linear algebra.
For this reason, HyperIso uses two complementary levels of parallelism. The decay-level
parallelism described above remains the most efficient acceleration mechanism for a single
27
expensive prediction, and it is used by deterministic stages such as central-value evaluations,
likelihood minimisation, Hessian or profile scans, and contour construction. However, Fig. 8
also shows that this inner parallelism is not asymptotically linear: once the QCD-factorisation
part has been distributed over enough workers, the residual serial work, memory traffic and
scheduling overhead set a practical speedup plateau. The Monte-Carlo covariance stage
has a different structure. The accepted nuisance draws are statistically independent which
makes them good candidates for parallelisation. In the multi-threaded Monte-Carlo mode,
HyperIso therefore gives priority to this outer parallelism: each worker owns an independent
observable model and parameter runtime context, draws nuisance points from the shared
sampler in a synchronised way, and evaluates its assigned predictions without modifying the
global parameter state. To avoid nested over-subscription, the internal decay thread count
is temporarily reduced, by default to one, while the Monte-Carlo workers are running. After
the covariance sample has been filled, the original decay-thread configuration is restored
automatically and the subsequent deterministic stages again use the decay-local threaded
caches. The number of threads allocated to Monte-Carlo sampling is set by the MC_threads
parameter of the StatisticConfig.
With this scheduling policy, the covariance-building part of Eq. (16) is better represented
as:
Tcov(nMC) ≃NMC
nMC
Tpred(D; nt = 1) + O(NMCD2) + Tsched,
(17)
where nMC is the number of Monte-Carlo workers and Tsched collects sampler synchronisation,
worker setup and result-merging overheads. Since the dominant term is usually the prediction
time, the scaling of the covariance stage is close to linear in nMC until the number of active
workers approaches the available hardware parallelism or the bookkeeping terms become
comparable to the prediction cost. The full workflow therefore uses the parallelism at the
level where it is most effective: sample-level parallelism for the Monte-Carlo covariance
construction, and decay-level parallelism for the remaining repeated predictions required by
fits and scans.
10
Software availability and reproducibility
The version of HyperIso described in this article is the public release v1.0.3, released on 20
July 2026. The source code, Python distributions, documentation and frozen reproducibility
references are available from:
• HyperIso website: https://hyperiso.in2p3.fr/;
• source release: HyperIso v1.0.3;
• release tag commit: 09d26ac6e71d;
• frozen-reference provenance: reproducibility/expected_outputs/reference_met
adata.json, which records the reference-build source commit and executable SHA-256;
• developer repository: https://github.com/Hyperiso/Hyperiso;
• GitHub release: https://github.com/Hyperiso/Hyperiso/releases/tag/v1.0.3;
28
• version-specific software archive: 10.5281/zenodo.21447072;
• Python package: https://pypi.org/project/pyhyperiso/1.0.3/;
• API documentation: https://hyperiso.github.io/Hyperiso/;
• license: GNU General Public License, version 3 or later.
The recommended installation route for the Python interface is:
1 python -m pip install "pyhyperiso==1.0.3"
The release contains Linux x86-64 manylinux wheels for CPython 3.10–3.12 and a source
distribution. Other platforms can build the C++, CLI and Python interfaces from source.
The standard CMake workflow for the C++ and CLI interfaces is:
1 cmake -S Hyperiso/Hyperiso/core -B build \
2
-G Ninja \
3
-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release \
4
-DBUILD_WITH_CLI=ON \
5
-DBUILD_WITH_PYTHON=ON
6 cmake --build build --parallel
7 cmake --install build --prefix "$HOME/.local"
Here -DBUILD_WITH_CLI=ON adds the standalone hyperiso-ui executable to the
standard library build. The separate option -DBUILD_WITH_APP=ON enables the development
applications and benchmark executables distributed inside the C++ modules.
The generic MARTY-based workflow requires an external MARTY installation.
Native
examples require GSL and a C++20-compatible compiler. Optional spectrum-generation
workflows may also rely on 2HDMC [29] or SOFTSUSY [30].
The release archive contains a root-level reproducibility/ directory. This directory
is the canonical location for the frozen input files, run scripts, expected text outputs and
numerical tolerances used to reproduce the compact reference examples reported in this
paper. The suite is intentionally command-line based: the CLI provides the most stable
release-level interface, while the C++ and Python examples distributed with the source tree
expose the same workflows programmatically.
29
1 reproducibility/
2
README.md
3
manifest.json
4
inputs/
5
sm_reference.flha
6
thdm_reference.lha
7
susy_reference.slha
8
scripts/
9
run_cli_suite.sh
10
normalize_cli_output.py
11
check_expected_outputs.py
12
freeze_reference_outputs.py
13
expected_outputs/
14
reference_metadata.json
The suite complements the unit and integration tests; it does not replace them. It can
be executed from the repository root with
1 HYPERISO_REPRO_THREADS=1 \
2
./reproducibility/scripts/run_cli_suite.sh
The reference suite is summarised in Table 7. Deterministic examples are compared
using absolute and relative tolerances. The Monte-Carlo example is run with a fixed seed
through the –seed option and with the serial MC path by default; it is therefore suitable
for release-to-release comparisons. Parallel MC runs are kept for performance studies rather
than bitwise reproducibility checks.
The reference metadata records the source tag and source commit, the executable
SHA-256 digest, input-file hashes, operating system, architecture, compiler, CMake, GSL,
Eigen and Python versions, build type, serial thread count and measured execution time of
each reference case. The timings characterise the frozen reference host and should not be
interpreted as universal performance values.
11
Conclusion
We have presented HyperIso, a new standalone modular program, building on the physics
heritage of SuperIso, designed to evaluate Wilson coefficients, flavour observables and
statistical quantities in a unified framework. The C++ core provides the common calculation
backend, while the Python, command-line and Dash interfaces make the tool accessible for
scripted, automated and interactive workflows. HyperIso combines native implementations
for established scenarios with a MARTY-based route for user-defined BSM models supported
by that interface at leading order, while retaining the internal machinery for observable
calculations, uncertainty propagation and statistical interpretation.
The validation against SuperIso confirms the consistency of the native calculations for
the supported benchmark models. The comparison between the native HyperIso route and
the MARTY route on common benchmark models provides the complementary validation of
30
ID
Workflow
Reference check
R1
B-sector Wilson coefficients
BCoefficients;
C7, C8, C9, C10 at matching and low
scales.
R2
Scalar Wilson coefficients
BScalarCoefficients; Cµ
Q1, Cµ
Q2 in the scalar sector.
R3
Inclusive and leptonic ob-
servables
BR_Bs__mu_mu and BR_B__Xs_gamma.
R4
Binned angular observable
F_L_B0__K*0_mu_mu in the fixed q2 bin [1.1, 6.0] GeV2.
R5
Seeded
MC
uncertainty
propagation
statistic summary –uncertainties –draws 200
–seed 123456, run through the serial MC path, with the
accepted-sample CSV checked against the frozen reference.
R6
THDM archived-spectrum
benchmark
BSM B-sector coefficients C7, C8, C9, C10 at NNLO, using
the archived THDM spectrum with –spectrum true; no
runtime call to 2HDMC.
R7
SUSY
archived-spectrum
benchmark
BSM B-sector coefficients C7, C8, C9, C10 at NNLO, using
the archived SUSY spectrum with –spectrum true; no
runtime call to SOFTSUSY.
Table 7:
Compact reference reproducibility suite shipped with the release archive.
The commands, input file, expected output names and tolerances are defined in
reproducibility/manifest.json.
the generic-model interface; the numerical interpretation of these differences is documented
in the validation section and fixed together with the released MARTY benchmark inputs.
Together with the user-guide examples and reproducibility package, this makes HyperIso a
practical tool for both phenomenological studies and software extensions.
The v1.0.3 release also validates installed-package execution: the statistical layer resolves
nuisance assets through the active runtime provider, and the public Python API supports
exact experimental-measurement selections used by the released fit-reproduction examples.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank S. Neshatpour for insightful discussions. This research is funded in part
by the National Research Agency (ANR) under project no. ANR-21-CE31-0002-01. The
authors acknowledge the open-source scientific software ecosystem on which HyperIso builds,
including MARTY, GSL, pybind11, 2HDMC and SOFTSUSY. The development of HyperIso also
benefited from the physics conventions and validation experience accumulated in SuperIso.
31
A
Parameter block structure
A.1
SM Parameters
Block SMINPUTS
This block is defined by the SLHA convention. We added two entries
to store the redundant parameter sin2 θW as precise values of this parameter are needed in
order to comply with some authors’ conventions in observable calculation. Default values
are gathered in Table 8.
ID
Parameter
Default value
1
α−1
em(MZ)
127.930
2
GF
1.166 378 5(6) × 10−5 GeV−2
3
αs(MZ)
0.1180(9)
4
Mpole
Z
91.1879(20) GeV
5
mMS
b
(mb)
4.186(6) GeV
6
mpole
t
172.60(27) GeV
7_1
s2,MS
w
0.231 22(6)
7_2
s2,OS
w
0.223 48(10)
Table 8: Entries of the SMINPUTS block, from PDG [31].
Block MASS
This block follows the SLHA convention and stores particle masses that are
not already provided through SMINPUTS. For the light quarks, the default values correspond
to running MS masses at the scales indicated below, whereas the charged-lepton and
electroweak-boson entries are pole masses. Default values are gathered in Table 9.
ID
Parameter
Default value
Scale
1
mMS
d
0.004 70(7) GeV
2 GeV
2
mMS
u
0.002 16(7) GeV
2 GeV
3
mMS
s
0.0929(7) GeV
2 GeV
4
mMS
c
1.2729(45) GeV
mc
11
me
0.000 510 998 950 69(16) GeV
–
13
mµ
0.105 658 375 5(23) GeV
–
15
mτ
1.776 93(9) GeV
–
24
Mpole
W
80.3625(77) GeV
–
25
Mpole
h
125.13(11) GeV
–
Table 9: Entries of the MASS block, from PDG [31].
32
Block VCKMIN
This block is defined by the SLHA convention. Default values are gathered
in Table 10.
ID
Parameter
Default value
1
λ
0.225 17(68)
2
A
0.826(17)
3
ρ
0.1576(92)
4
η
0.3556(71)
Table 10: Entries of the VCKMIN block, from PDG [31].
A.2
Flavour Parameters
Here we only consider flavour parameters that are explicitly defined in the FLHA format [18].
Flavour parameters (such as specific form factors, hadronic and leptonic moments. . . ) which
could technically be classified in the FPARAM block are instead stored in observable-specific
custom blocks (see A.3) for improved readability.
Block FLIFE
This block contains particle lifetimes in seconds, indexed by the corresponding
PDG Monte Carlo particle code. The default values used by HyperIso are gathered in
Table 11.
ID
Parameter
Default value
130
τK0
L
5.0990(21) × 10−8 s
211
τπ+
2.6033(5) × 10−8 s
310
τK0
S
8.954(4) × 10−11 s
321
τK+
1.238(2) × 10−8 s
323
τK∗+
1.280(2) × 10−23 s
411
τD+
1.033(5) × 10−12 s
421
τD0
4.103(10) × 10−13 s
431
τD+
s
5.012(22) × 10−13 s
511
τB0
1.517(4) × 10−12 s
521
τB+
1.638(4) × 10−12 s
531
τB0s
1.527(11) × 10−12 s
5122
τΛ0
b
1.466(10) × 10−12 s
Table 11: Entries of the FLIFE block, from PDG [31]
Block FMASS
This block contains the masses of hadrons entering the flavour observables,
indexed by their PDG Monte Carlo particle code. The defaults are expressed in GeV and
33
are gathered in Table 12.
ID
Parameter
Default value
111
mπ0
0.134 976 8(5) GeV
113
mρ0
0.769 68(35) GeV
211
mπ+
0.139 570 39(18) GeV
311
mK0
0.497 611 GeV
313
mK∗0
0.895 55(26) GeV
321
mK+
0.493 677(13) GeV
323
mK∗+
0.891 67(26) GeV
333
mϕ
1.019 46(16) GeV
411
mD+
1.869 66(5) GeV
413
mD∗+
2.010 26 GeV
421
mD0
1.864 84(5) GeV
423
mD∗0
2.006 85(5) GeV
431
mD+
s
1.968 35(7) GeV
443
mJ/ψ
3.096 900(6) GeV
511
mB0
5.279 72(8) GeV
521
mB+
5.279 41(7) GeV
531
mB0s
5.366 93(10) GeV
3122
mΛ0
1.115 683(6) GeV
5122
mΛ0
b
5.619 57(16) GeV
100443
mψ(2S)
3.686 097(10) GeV
Table 12: Entries of the FMASS block, from PDG [31]
Block FCONST
This block contains the leptonic decay constants fP of pseudoscalar mesons,
which are defined from the matrix element of the axial current between the meson state and
the vacuum,
⟨0|¯q1γµγ5q2|P(p)⟩= −ifP pµ.
(18)
For vector mesons, the second index distinguishes longitudinal (∥) and transverse (⊥) decay
constants.
The transverse constants are scale dependent; the distributed defaults use
µ = 1 GeV. The complete set of default values is gathered in Table 13.
Block FCONSTRATIO
This block contains the ratio of leptonic decay constants of pseu-
doscalar mesons. Default values are gathered in Table 14.
A.3
Observable related parameters
Block B_Ks
This block contains the parameters needed to compute observables related to
the B →K∗(→Kπ)ℓ+ℓ−decay. Due to the different values of the B →K∗form factors
leading to phenomenologically significant differences in the final observables, HyperIso lets
34
ID
Parameter
Default value
Ref.
Scale
211_1
fπ+
0.1302(12) GeV
[32]
1 GeV
311_1
fK0
0.1556(7) GeV
[32]
1 GeV
321_1
fK+
0.1557(7) GeV
[32]
1 GeV
313_1
f∥
K∗0
0.204(7) GeV
[33]
1 GeV
313_2
f⊥
K∗0
0.159(6) GeV
[33]
1 GeV
323_1
f∥
K∗+
0.204(7) GeV
[33]
1 GeV
323_2
f⊥
K∗+
0.159(6) GeV
[33]
1 GeV
333_1
f∥
ϕ
0.233(4) GeV
[33]
1 GeV
333_2
f⊥
ϕ
0.191(4) GeV
[33]
1 GeV
411_1
fD+
0.2126(7) GeV
[32]
1 GeV
511_1
fB0
0.1900(13) GeV
[32]
1 GeV
521_1
fB+
0.1900(13) GeV
[32]
1 GeV
531_1
fB0s
0.234(10) GeV
[32]
1 GeV
Table 13: Entries of the FCONST block.
ID
Parameter
Default value
Ref.
Scale
321_211_1_1
fK/fπ
1.1916(34) GeV
[32]
1 GeV
Table 14: Entries of the FCONSTRATIO block.
the user choose among several options gathered in the enum BKstarllDecay::FF_SRC. The
possible options are:
⋄FF_SRC::BSZ_SR_LAT: LCSR + Lattice fit from [34] (Table 15 p. 56)
⋄FF_SRC::BSZ_SR: LCSR only fit from [34] (Table 14 p. 55)
⋄FF_SRC::GRvDV: LCSR + Lattice fit from [35]
⋄FF_SRC::GKvD_SR_LAT: LCSR + Lattice fit from [36]
⋄FF_SRC::GKvD_SR: LCSR only fit from [36]
⋄FF_SRC::HLMW: Lattice fit from [37] and [38] (Tables 5 and 6 p. 9)
These parameters are stored within the block under the format i_j_k representing the series
expansion parameter α(k)
j
where i is the form factor choice id (in enum order), j is the form
factor id (in enum BV::FF order) and k is the series expansion order. Default values are
gathered in Table 15.
Block B_ll
This block contains the parameters needed to compute observables related to
B →ℓ+ℓ−decays. Default values are gathered in Table 16.
2When this parameter is set to −1, then µ0 = µb is enforced at runtime.
35
ID
Parameter
Default value
Ref.
Scale
Comment
7_1
a⊥
1
0.04(7)
[39]
1 GeV
–
7_2
a⊥
2
0.10(8)
[39]
1 GeV
–
8_1
a∥
1
0.06(7)
[39]
1 GeV
–
8_2
a∥
2
0.16(5)
[39]
1 GeV
–
9
ζA
3
0.032
[33]
1 GeV
–
10
ζV
3
0.013
[33]
1 GeV
–
11
ωA
1,0
−2.1
[33]
1 GeV
–
12_1
˜δ+
0.16
[33]
1 GeV
–
12_2
˜δ−
−0.16
[33]
1 GeV
–
13
λB
0.46(11) GeV
[40]
1 GeV
–
14
Λh
0.5 GeV
–
–
Hadronic scale
15_1
q2
low
9 GeV2
–
–
Low-recoil boundary
15_2
q2
high
14 GeV2
–
–
High-q2 boundary
16
T B→K∗
1
(0)
0.312(32)
–
1 GeV
Legacy normalisation input
17
µ0
−1 GeV
–
–
Runtime sentinel
Table 15: Selected legacy and QCD-factorisation entries of the B_Ks block. The identifiers
and numerical values match the v1.0.3 default asset. The standalone T1(0) entry is retained
as an unreferenced legacy normalisation input in the released database; the form-factor
parametrisations used for semileptonic predictions are documented separately below.
ID
Parameter
Default value
Ref.
1
ys
0.0635(14)
[41]
2
ηBBS
0.995(5)
[42]
Table 16: Entries of the B_ll block.
Block B_Xs
This block contains the parameters needed to compute observables related to
the B →Xsγ inclusive decay. Default values are gathered in Table 17.
Block B_Dlnu
This block contains the parameters needed to compute observables related
to B →D decays. Default values are gathered in Table 18.
Block B_Dslnu
This block contains the parameters needed to compute observables related
to B →D∗decays. Default values are gathered in Table 19.
Block B_K
This block contains the parameters needed to compute observables related to
B →K decays. As for the B →K∗ℓℓdecay there are several form factor choice implemented
36
ID
Parameter
Default value
Ref.
Comment
1
E0
1.6 GeV
–
–
2
BR(B →Xce¯ν)exp.
0.1065(16)
[43]
–
3
µ2
G
0.336(64)
[43]
–
4
ρ3
D
0.153(45)
[43]
–
5
ρ3
LS
−0.145(98)
[43]
–
6
λ2
0.120(18) GeV2
[41,44]
–
7
µc
2.45(155) GeV
–
–
8
z0
1010
–
For interpolation
9
z1
1020
–
For interpolation
Table 17: Entries of the B_Xs block.
ID
Parameter
Default value
Ref.
1
V1(1)
1.074(24)
[18]
2
ρ2
D
1.186(54)
[18]
3
∆(w)
1(1)
[18]
Table 18: Entries of the B_Dlnu block.
ID
Parameter
Default value
Ref.
1
hA1(1)
0.921(17)
[18]
2
ρ2
D∗
1.214(26)
[18]
3
R1(1)
1.403(33)
[18]
4
R2(1)
0.864(20)
[18]
Table 19: Entries of the B_Dslnu block.
in HyperIso which are stored in the BKllDecay::FF_SRC enumeration as follows:
⋄BP_FF_Src::AS: LCSR + lattice fit for the B →K form factors from [45] (Appendix A,
Eqs. (51)–(53)).
⋄BP_FF_Src::GRvDV: Dispersive fit combining LCSR and lattice constraints from [35].
⋄BP_FF_Src::GKvD_SR_LAT: Fit combining the LCSR results of [36] with lattice con-
straints.
⋄BP_FF_Src::GKvD_SR: LCSR-only fit based on [36].
⋄BP_FF_Src::FLAG24: Lattice average from the FLAG Review 2024 [32].
⋄BP_FF_Src::HPQCD22: Fully relativistic lattice fit over the full physical q2 region from
the HPQCD collaboration [46].
37
Default values are gathered in Table 20.
ID
Parameter
Default value
Ref.
Scale
Comment
8_1
a1
0.06(3)
[40]
1 GeV
8_2
a2
0.25(15)
[40]
1 GeV
13
λB
0.46(11) GeV
[40]
1 GeV
–
14
Λh
0.5 GeV
–
–
Hadronic scale
15_1
q2
low
9 GeV2
–
–
Low-recoil boundary
15_2
q2
high
14 GeV2
–
–
High-q2 boundary
16
Lχ
1.304
[46]
–
Table 20: Entries of the B_K block.
Block B_Xsll
This block contains the parameters needed to compute observables related
to B →Xsℓℓinclusive decay. Default values are gathered in Table 21.
ID
Parameter
Default value
Ref.
1
λ1
−0.15(10) GeV2
[47]
2
ρ1
0.06(6) GeV3
[47]
Table 21: Entries of the B_Xsll block.
Block K_ll
This block contains the parameters needed to compute observables related to
K0
L,S →ℓℓdecay. Default values are gathered in Table 22.
ID
Parameter
Default value
Ref.
1
BR(K0
L →γγ)exp.
5.47(4) × 10−4
[31]
2
BR(K0
S →γγ)exp.
2.63(17) × 10−6
[31]
3
αexp.
−1.611(44)
[48]
4
∆Λ
0(1)
[48]
Table 22: Entries of the K_ll block.
Block K_lnu
This block contains the parameters needed to compute observables related
to K →ℓν decay. Default values are gathered in Table 23.
Block K_pi
This block contains the parameters needed to compute observables related to
K →πνν decay. Default values are gathered in Table 24.
38
ID
Parameter
Default value
Ref.
1
δem
70(35) × 10−4
[49]
Table 23: Entries of the K_lnu block.
ID
Parameter
Default value
Ref.
1
κL
2.231(13)
[50]
2
κ+
0.5173(25)
[50]
3
∆em
−0.003
[51]
Table 24: Entries of the K_pi block.
Block B_phi
This block contains the parameters needed to compute observables related
to the Bs →ϕℓ+ℓ−decay. The form factor choice is the same as for B →K∗ℓℓdecays,
except for those from GKvD. Default values are gathered in Table 25.
ID
Parameter
Default value
Ref.
Scale
Comment
7_1
a⊥
1
0.0
[39]
1 GeV
–
7_2
a⊥
2
0.14(7)
[39]
1 GeV
–
8_1
a∥
1
0.0
[39]
1 GeV
–
8_2
a∥
2
0.23(8)
[39]
1 GeV
–
9
ζA
3
0.032
[33]
1 GeV
–
10
ζV
3
0.013
[33]
1 GeV
–
11
ωA
1,0
−2.1
[33]
1 GeV
–
12_1
˜δ+
0.33
[33]
1 GeV
–
12_2
˜δ−
0.0
[33]
1 GeV
–
13
λB
0.46(11) GeV
[40]
1 GeV
–
14
Λh
0.5 GeV
–
–
Hadronic scale
15_1
q2
low
9 GeV2
–
–
Low-recoil boundary
15_2
q2
high
14 GeV2
–
–
High-q2 boundary
Table 25: Selected entries of the B_phi block. The form-factor parametrisations used for
semileptonic predictions are documented separately below.
Block Lb_L
This block contains the parameters needed to compute observables related
to the Λb →Λℓℓdecay. There is currently only one form factor choice taken from [52] and
follow the same naming conventions as the other decays. Default values are gathered in
Table 26.
39
ID
Parameter
Default value
Ref.
1
αΛ
0.642(13)
[52]
Table 26: Entries of the Lb_L block.
B
Observable catalogue by decay family
This appendix gives a decay-by-decay view (see Tables 27, 28 and 29) of the native observable
coverage summarised in Table 4. The entries are grouped by physics channel rather than by
internal C++ class name. Canonical mapper names are intentionally not exhaustively listed
here because the full list is generated by the observable registry and distributed with the
code.
Decay family
Internal family
Representative observables
B →Xsγ
B__Xs
Inclusive radiative branching fraction and re-
lated radiative observables.
B →Xsℓ+ℓ−
B__Xs_ll
Inclusive rare-decay branching fractions and
forward–backward asymmetries for e, µ and
τ channels.
B →K∗γ
B__Kstar_gamma
Exclusive radiative branching fractions and
isospin asymmetries for charged and neutral
modes.
B →K∗ℓ+ℓ−
B__Kstar_l_l
Differential rates, AF B, FL, FT , A(i)
T , H(i)
T , P (′)
i ,
Si and CP-asymmetry observables.
B →Kℓ+ℓ−
B__K_l_l
Differential rates, branching fractions, AF B, FH
and lepton-universality ratios.
Bs →ϕℓ+ℓ−
Bs__phi_l_l
Differential rates, angular observables, opti-
mised observables and CP-sensitive combina-
tions.
Λb →Λℓ+ℓ−
Lambda_b__
Lambda_l_l
Differential rates, longitudinal/transverse po-
larisation fractions and lepton/hadron forward–
backward asymmetries.
Table 27: Native rare and radiative B-sector observables.
C
Leptonic decays of charged pseudoscalar mesons
The purely leptonic decays of pseudoscalar mesons P ± →ℓ±ν happen in the SM through a
virtual W boson. In extensions of the SM with two Higgs doublets, charged scalars interfere
destructively with the SM. The most general effective Hamiltonian for such decays (at
dimension 6) reads:
HCC = 4GF
√
2 Vquqd
X
CkOk + h.c.,
(19)
40
Decay family
Internal family
Representative observables
Bs,d →ℓ+ℓ−
B__l_l
Leptonic branching fractions, untagged Bs
modes and related lifetime-sensitive quantities.
Bu →ℓν
B__l_nu
Charged-B leptonic branching fractions and
charged-current ratios.
B →Dℓν
B__D_l_nu
Branching fractions, R(D), forward–backward
asymmetry and charged-lepton polarisation.
B →D∗ℓν
B__Dstar
_l_nu
Branching fractions, R(D∗), forward–backward
asymmetry, τ polarisation and D∗polarisation.
D →ℓν
D__l_nu
Charm leptonic branching fractions.
Ds →ℓν
Ds__l_nu
Ds →µν and Ds →τν branching fractions.
Table 28: Native leptonic and charged-current observables.
Decay family
Internal family
Representative observables
K →πν¯ν
K__pi_nu_nu
K+ →π+ν¯ν and KL →π0ν¯ν branching frac-
tions.
KL,S →µ+µ−
K__l_l
Rare kaon dimuon branching fractions and
short-/long-distance components.
K →ℓν
K__l_nu
Leptonic kaon ratios such as Rµ23.
Neutral-meson mixing
M0_Mix
∆MBd, ∆MBs, ∆MK, |ϵK|, CP phases and
semileptonic asymmetries.
Custom observable layer
runtime registry
User-defined observables attached to native or
user-defined decay families.
Table 29: Native kaon, mixing and extension-layer observables.
where Vquqd is a CKM matrix element, and the 5 independent operators read:
OV1 = (¯quγµPLqd)
¯ℓγµPLν

,
OV2 = (¯quγµPRqd)
¯ℓγµPLν

,
OS1 = (¯quPLqd)
¯ℓPLν

,
(20)
OS2 = (¯quPRqd)
¯ℓPLν

,
OT = (¯quσµνPLqd)
¯ℓσµνPLν

.
Using then the definition of the meson’s decay constant and the quark EoM,
D
0
¯quγµγ5qd
 ¯P
E
= ipµfP ,
D
0
¯quγ5qd
 ¯P
E
= −i
m2
P
mqu + mqd
fP ,
(21)
41
while the other currents do not contribute. The complete matrix elements for the effective
operators then read:
D
ℓ¯ν
OV1,2
 ¯P
E
= ∓i
2fP
¯ℓ̸pPLν

,
D
ℓ¯ν
OS1,2
 ¯P
E
= ± i
2
m2
P
mqu + mqd
fP
¯ℓPLν

,
(22)
D
ℓ¯ν
OT
 ¯P
E
= 0.
The decaying pseudoscalar meson has spin 0, and the outgoing (anti-)neutrino must be
(right) left-handed, thus the outgoing (anti-)lepton must have the same chirality. Using the
chirality eigenstates of Dirac spinors, and the CoM kinematics where P is at rest and ℓ, ν
are back-to-back, the leptonic part of the matrix elements evaluates to:
¯ℓ̸pPLν = mℓmP
√1 −rℓ,
¯ℓPLν = mP
√1 −rℓ,
(23)
where rℓ= m2
ℓ/m2
P . Further defining CA = CV2 −CV1 and CP = CS2 −CS1, the squared
amplitude reads:
|M|2 = 2G2
F |Vquqd|2f2
P m2
P (1 −rℓ)
mℓCA −
m2
P
mqu + mqd
CP

2
.
(24)
And finally, using
Γ =
β
16πmP
|M|2,
β = 1 −rℓ,
(25)
the branching ratio reads:
B(P →ℓν) = G2
F
8π |Vquqd|2f2
P mP τP (1 −rℓ)2
mℓCA −
m2
P
mqu + mqd
CP

2
.
(26)
D
Extended validation tables
This appendix collects the complete Wilson-coefficient validation tables. The SuperIso–
HyperIso comparison is split into SM, THDM and SUSY benchmarks (see Tables 30, 31
and 32). The native-HyperIso/MARTY comparison is split into SM and type-II THDM BSM
contributions at the matching scale.
Tables 33 and 34 show the displayed native-HyperIso/MARTY LO export at the matching
scale for the type-II THDM benchmark. Coefficients that vanish in both calculations are
omitted. The printed validation subset keeps the standard B-sector coefficients, the non-zero
primed coefficients and the muonic scalar coefficients Cµ
Q1 and Cµ
Q2. Electron and tau scalar
entries, as well as the C′
Q family, are omitted from the paper tables for compactness.
42
coefs
SI
HI
%
µW = O(MW )
SM
C1
0.158 396 345 3
0.158 396 345 1
0
C2
1.001 843 983
1.001 843 983
0
C3
−0.000 293 168 778 2
−0.000 293 168 778 2
0
C4
−0.003 248 811 761
−0.003 247 432 028
0.042 478
C5
3.386 474 459 × 10−5
3.386 879 571 × 10−5
0.011 962
C6
6.349 639 566 × 10−5
6.349 639 566 × 10−5
0
C7
−0.210 742 753 6
−0.210 677 423 2
0.031 005
C8
−0.115 116 720 2
−0.115 091 555 1
0.021 863
C9
1.930 302 269
1.929 625 99
0.035 041
C10
−4.171 695 742
−4.168 626 236
0.073 606
CQ1
−0.000 260 39
−0.000 260 394
0.001 536
CQ2
0.000 485 819 217
0.000 484 792
0.000 413
CP7
−0.004 237 07
−0.004 237 07
0
CP8
−0.002 219 76
−0.002 219 76
0
CP9
0
0
0
CP10
0
0
0
CPQ1
0
0
0
CPQ2
0
0
0
Table 30: Complete comparison between SuperIso (SI) and HyperIso (HI) for the SM
benchmark at matching scale.
E
Efficient computation of the profiled likelihood
For a given set of observables, there are usually many nuisance parameters (typically O(100))
that we need to optimise in order to compute the profiled likelihood function ˆℓ(p). Even
the best algorithms cannot solve such high-dimensional optimisation problems efficiently
enough, especially as this step would be performed thousands of times to compute the
confidence contours. We need to use some additional information that we may have on
the nuisances to reduce the dimensionality of this problem. One way we can do this is to
separate the nuisances in two groups, the “well-behaved” ηW and the “ill-behaved” ηI. A
nuisance parameter ηa is“well-behaved” if its marginal distribution is Gaussian and the
model function f(p, η) is linear in ηa with good approximation. All the other nuisances are
then called “ill-behaved”. Testing if the model is linear in a given nuisance only requires
3 calls to the model function and can be performed once for all provided the confidence
contour is not too large.
The profiling over the well-behaved nuisances can be performed analytically using the
Laplace approximation. Let η0 be the mode of the nuisance distribution. If the nuisances
are well-behaved, the log-likelihood around η0 is quadratic with good approximation:
ℓ(p, η0 + δη) = ℓ(p, η0) +
X
k
∂ℓ
∂ηk

η0
δηk + 1
2
X
k,ℓ
∂2ℓ
∂ηk∂ηℓ

η0
δηkδηℓ.
(27)
43
coefs
SI
HI
%
µW = O(MW )
THDM
C1
0
0
0
C2
0
0
0
C3
−3.723 792 155 × 10−8
−3.723 792 155 × 10−8
0
C4
9.296 889 404 × 10−6
9.296 896 376 × 10−6
0.000 075
C5
1.400 574 929 × 10−8
1.400 577 667 × 10−8
0.000 195
C6
2.626 083 695 × 10−8
2.626 083 695 × 10−8
0
C7
0.000 800 787 454 6
0.000 800 478 691 8
0.038 565
C8
0.000 870 486 678 4
0.000 870 486 466 6
0.000 024
C9
−0.000 277 855 314 1
−0.000 277 854 454 5
0.000 309
C10
−0.004 887 954 445
−0.004 887 955 214
0.000 016
CQ1
−0.000 382 57
−0.000 382 573
0.000 784
CQ2
6.37 × 10−6
6.3716 × 10−6
0.025 115
CP7
0
0
0
CP8
0
0
0
CP9
0
0
0
CP10
0
0
0
CPQ1
0
0
0
CPQ2
0
0
0
Table 31: Complete comparison between SuperIso (SI) and HyperIso (HI) for the THDM
benchmark at matching scale.
For clarity we define:
[⃗gη]k = ∂ℓ
∂ηk

η0
,
[Hη]kℓ=
∂2ℓ
∂ηk∂ηℓ

η0
,
(28)
so that:
ℓ(p, η0 + δη) = ℓ(p, η0) +⃗gη · δ⃗η + 1
2δ⃗η · Hηδ⃗η.
(29)
At a local minimum η∗of ℓ, its gradient vanishes
∇ℓ(p, ˆη) =⃗gη + Hηδ⃗η ∗= 0 ⇐⇒δ⃗η ∗= −H−1
η⃗gη,
(30)
hence the analytic expression of the profiled likelihood reads:
ˆℓ(p) = ℓ(p, η0 + δ⃗η ∗) = ℓ(p, η0) −1
2⃗gη · H−1
η⃗gη.
(31)
We still need to compute the Hessian of the likelihood function at the nuisances’ central
values. It reads explicitly:
[Hη]ij =
X
k,ℓ
∂2ℓO
∂rk∂rℓ
∂rk
∂ηi
∂rℓ
∂ηj
+
X
k
∂ℓO
∂rk
∂2rk
∂ηi∂ηj
+
∂2ℓη
∂ηi∂ηj
,
(32)
and as rk is just the model’s prediction shifted by a constant,
∂rk
∂ηi
= ∂fk
∂ηi
.
(33)
44
coefs
SI
HI
%
µW = O(MW )
SUSY
C1
−5.594 240 306 × 10−7
−5.594 240 306 × 10−7
0
C2
0
0
0
C3
4.934 433 6 × 10−7
4.934 424 585 × 10−7
0.000 183
C4
4.003 675 142 × 10−6
4.003 666 186 × 10−6
0.000 224
C5
−4.444 685 28 × 10−8
−4.444 694 295 × 10−8
0.000 203
C6
−8.333 807 436 × 10−8
−8.333 798 422 × 10−8
0.000 108
C7
0.000 845 549 310 7
0.000 845 147 937 2
0.047 480
C8
−0.010 110 815 2
−0.010 110 883
0.000 671
C9
0.005 880 995 78
0.005 879 457 677
0.026 157
C10
0.005 718 707 991
0.005 718 690 65
0.000 303
CQ1
−0.000 430 408 193 3
−0.000 430 374 580 2
0.007 810
CQ2
0.000 191 105 355 5
0.000 191 072 809 2
0.017 032
CP7
0.000 219 408
0.000 219 408
0
CP8
1.0434 × 10−5
1.043 37 × 10−5
0.002 875
CP9
−2.968 × 10−6
−2.967 54 × 10−6
0.015 500
CP10
7.0043 × 10−5
7.0043 × 10−5
0
CPQ1
−6.9317 × 10−6
−6.931 74 × 10−6
0.000 577
CPQ2
−6.9315 × 10−6
−6.931 49 × 10−6
0.000 144
Table 32: Complete comparison between SuperIso (SI) and HyperIso (HI) for the SUSY
benchmark at matching scale.
Group Coefficient
HI
MARTY
δrel
B
C2
1
1.000 064
6.4 × 10−5
B
C7
−0.194 114 75
−0.194 208 7
0.000 484
B
C8
−0.096 902 814
−0.096 975 58
0.000 751
B
C9
2.007 624 8
2.007 624 8
0
B
C10
−4.463 736 1
−4.479 714 + 0.088 600 65 i
0.0202
B′
C′
7
−0.006 627 448 2
−0.006 534 86
0.014
B′
C′
8
−0.003 308 447 1
−0.003 262 563
0.0139
BS
Cµ
Q1
−0.000 369 565 18
−0.000 358 989 7
0.0289
BS
Cµ
Q2
0.000 336 558 24
0.000 335 464 8
0.004 64
Table 33: Complete displayed native-HyperIso/MARTY comparison for the SM contribution
at matching scale. The comparison is restricted to LO, the order generated by the MARTY in-
terface in this workflow. The last column gives the relative difference defined in Eq. 13.
Near the minimum of ℓ, the first derivatives of the likelihood function are close to zero, we
can therefore neglect the second sum in the expression of the Hessian, leaving the so-called
Gauss-Newton matrix
Hη = JT
η WOJη + Wη,
(34)
where Jη is the Jacobian matrix of the model function f w.r.t. the nuisance parameters
and WO, Wη are the local curvatures of the likelihood functions, which can be computed
analytically using our copula distributions. The only numerically challenging task is to
45
Group Coefficient
HI
MARTY
δrel
B
C7
−0.099 068 547
−0.099 057 4
0.000 113
B
C8
−0.099 275 045
−0.099 258 82
0.000 163
B
C9
0.000 124 062 79
0.000 122 847 7
0.009 79
B
C10
−0.006 580 194 5
−0.006 560 991
0.002 92
B′
C′
7
−0.003 382 389 3
−0.003 327 419
0.0163
B′
C′
8
−0.003 389 439 5
−0.003 333 466
0.0165
B′
C′
9
−7.382 747 2 × 10−5
−7.365 517 × 10−5
0.002 33
B′
C′
10
0.000 559 868 23
0.000 557 905
0.003 51
BS
Cµ
Q1
−0.002 273 418 8
−0.001 873 1 −0.000 322 062 i
0.226
BS
Cµ
Q2
0.002 059 926 9
0.001 624 921 + 0.000 314 896 8 i
0.261
Table 34: Complete displayed native-HyperIso/MARTY comparison for the genuine type-II
THDM BSM contribution at matching scale. The comparison is restricted to LO, the
order generated by the MARTY interface in this workflow. The last column gives the relative
difference defined in Eq. 13.
compute the first-order derivatives of the likelihood function,⃗gη and the Jacobian of the
model function Jη.
In terms of the copula log-density c(u) and the marginal densities pk(z), the curvature
matrices read:
Wij = −
∂2c
∂ui∂uj
pipj + δij
"
−∂c
∂ui
p′
i −p′′
i pi −p′
i
2
p2
i
#
,
(35)
and the expressions of the first and second derivatives of the copulas’ log-densities are
analytical for the Gaussian and Student copulas.
They are implemented explicitly in
the statistical backend; the resulting expressions are lengthy but follow directly from
differentiating the corresponding log-density with respect to the transformed normal or
Student variables.
46
References
[1] F. Mahmoudi, SuperIso: A Program for calculating the isospin asymmetry of B →K∗γ
in the MSSM, Comput. Phys. Commun. 178 (2008) 745–754.
arXiv:0710.2067,
doi:10.1016/j.cpc.2007.12.006.
[2] F. Mahmoudi, SuperIso v2.3: A Program for calculating flavor physics observables in
Supersymmetry, Comput. Phys. Commun. 180 (2009) 1579–1613. arXiv:0808.3144,
doi:10.1016/j.cpc.2009.02.017.
[3] F. Mahmoudi, SuperIso v3.0, flavor physics observables calculations: Extension to
NMSSM, Comput. Phys. Commun. 180 (2009) 1718–1719. doi:10.1016/j.cpc.2009
.05.001.
[4] S. Neshatpour, F. Mahmoudi, Flavour Physics with SuperIso, PoS TOOLS2020 (2021)
036. arXiv:2105.03428, doi:10.22323/1.392.0036.
[5] T. Reymermier, N. Fardeau, F. Mahmoudi, Hyperiso: A general bsm calculator for
flavour observables (2026). doi:10.5281/zenodo.214470722.
URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.214470722
[6] T. Reymermier, N. Fardeau, F. Mahmoudi, Hyperiso: A general BSM calculator for
flavour observables, PoS EPS-HEP2025 (2026) 351. doi:10.22323/1.485.0351.
[7] G. Uhlrich, F. Mahmoudi, A. Arbey, MARTY – Modern ARtificial Theoretical phYsicist
A C++ framework automating symbolic calculations Beyond the Standard Model,
Comput. Phys. Commun. 264 (2021) 107928. arXiv:2011.02478, doi:10.1016/j.cp
c.2021.107928.
[8] G. Uhlrich, F. Mahmoudi, A. Arbey, MARTY, a new C++ framework for automated
symbolic calculations in Beyond the Standard Model physics, PoS ICHEP2020 (2021)
928. arXiv:2011.06558, doi:10.22323/1.390.0928.
[9] G. Uhlrich, F. Mahmoudi, A. Arbey, Automatic extraction of one-loop Wilson coefficients
in general BSM scenarios using MARTY-1.4, PoS EPS-HEP2021 (2022) 507. arXiv:
2110.14515, doi:10.22323/1.398.0507.
[10] P. Z. Skands, et al., SUSY Les Houches Accord: Interfacing susy spectrum calculators,
decay packages, and event generators, JHEP 07 (2004) 036. arXiv:hep-ph/0311123,
doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2004/07/036.
[11] B. C. Allanach, et al., SUSY Les Houches Accord 2, Comput. Phys. Commun. 180
(2009) 8–25. arXiv:0801.0045, doi:10.1016/j.cpc.2008.08.004.
[12] F. Mahmoudi, et al., Flavour Les Houches Accord: Interfacing Flavour related Codes,
Comput. Phys. Commun. 183 (2012) 285–298. arXiv:1008.0762, doi:10.1016/j.cp
c.2011.10.006.
[13] A. Cockburn, Hexagonal architecture, Technical Report HaT TR 2005.02, Humans and
Technology, original Ports and Adapters article (Sep. 2005).
URL https://alistair.cockburn.us/hexagonal-architecture/
47
[14] R. C. Martin, Agile Software Development: Principles, Patterns, and Practices, Prentice
Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2003.
[15] R. C. Martin, Clean architecture: a craftsman’s guide to software structure and design,
Prentice Hall Press, 2017.
[16] K. G. Chetyrkin, M. Misiak, M. Munz, |∆F| = 1 nonleptonic effective Hamiltonian
in a simpler scheme, Nucl. Phys. B 520 (1998) 279–297. arXiv:hep-ph/9711280,
doi:10.1016/S0550-3213(98)00131-X.
[17] Q.-S. Yan, C.-S. Huang, W. Liao, S.-H. Zhu, Exclusive semileptonic rare decays B →
(K, K∗)ℓ+ℓ−in supersymmetric theories, Phys. Rev. D 62 (2000) 094023. arXiv:
hep-ph/0004262, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.62.094023.
[18] Y. Sakaki, M. Tanaka, A. Tayduganov, R. Watanabe, Testing leptoquark models in
¯B →D(∗)τ ¯ν, Phys. Rev. D 88 (9) (2013) 094012. arXiv:1309.0301, doi:10.1103/Ph
ysRevD.88.094012.
[19] J. Aebischer, C. Bobeth, A. J. Buras, J. Kumar, SMEFT ATLAS of ∆F = 2 transitions,
JHEP 12 (2020) 187. arXiv:2009.07276, doi:10.1007/JHEP12(2020)187.
[20] J. Brod, M. Gorbahn, E. Stamou, Two-Loop Electroweak Corrections for the K →πν¯ν
Decays, Phys. Rev. D 83 (2011) 034030. arXiv:1009.0947, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD
.83.034030.
[21] M. Czakon, U. Haisch, M. Misiak, Four-Loop Anomalous Dimensions for Radiative
Flavour-Changing Decays, JHEP 03 (2007) 008.
arXiv:hep-ph/0612329, doi:
10.1088/1126-6708/2007/03/008.
[22] C. Bobeth, M. Gorbahn, E. Stamou, Electroweak Corrections to Bs,d →ℓ+ℓ−, Phys.
Rev. D 89 (3) (2014) 034023. arXiv:1311.1348, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.89.034023.
[23] M. Galassi, J. Davies, J. Theiler, B. Gough, G. Jungman, P. Alken, M. Booth, F. Rossi,
GNU Scientific Library Reference Manual (3rd Ed.), Network Theory Ltd., 2009.
[24] A. Sklar, Fonctions de répartition à n dimensions et leurs marges, Publications de
l’Institut de Statistique de l’Université de Paris 8 (1959) 229–231.
[25] F. James, M. Roos, MINUIT: A system for function minimization and analysis of
the parameter errors and correlations, Comput. Phys. Commun. 10 (1975) 343–367.
doi:10.1016/0010-4655(75)90039-9.
[26] A. Hayrapetyan, et al., Angular analysis of the B0 →K∗(892)0µ+µ−decay in proton-
proton collisions at √s = 13 TeV, Phys. Lett. B 864 (2025) 139406. arXiv:2411.11820,
doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2025.139406.
[27] T. Hurth, F. Mahmoudi, Y. Monceaux, S. Neshatpour, Data-driven analyses and
model-independent fits for present b→sℓℓresults, Phys. Rev. D 112 (11) (2025) 113003.
arXiv:2508.09986, doi:10.1103/bc5h-8jm3.
48
[28] R. Aaij, et al., Comprehensive Analysis of the B0→K*0µ+µ- Decay, Phys. Rev. Lett.
137 (2) (2026) 021802. arXiv:2512.18053, doi:10.1103/24g9-yn9d.
[29] D. Eriksson, J. Rathsman, O. Stål, 2HDMC: Two-higgs-doublet model calculator,
Comput. Phys. Commun. 181 (2010) 189–205. arXiv:0902.0851, doi:10.1016/j.cp
c.2009.09.011.
[30] B. C. Allanach, SOFTSUSY: A program for calculating supersymmetric spectra,
Comput. Phys. Commun. 143 (2002) 305–331.
arXiv:hep-ph/0104145, doi:
10.1016/S0010-4655(01)00460-X.
[31] F. Takahashi, et al., Review of Particle Physics, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 41 (2026) 2630011.
doi:10.1142/S0217751X26300115.
[32] Y. Aoki, et al., FLAG Review 2024, Physical Review D 113 (1) (11 2024). arXiv:
2411.04268.
[33] P. Ball, V. M. Braun, Y. Koike, K. Tanaka, Higher twist distribution amplitudes of
vector mesons in QCD: Formalism and twist - three distributions, Nucl. Phys. B 529
(1998) 323–382. arXiv:hep-ph/9802299, doi:10.1016/S0550-3213(98)00356-3.
[34] A. Bharucha, D. M. Straub, R. Zwicky, B →V ℓ+ℓ−in the Standard Model from
light-cone sum rules, JHEP 08 (2016) 098. arXiv:1503.05534, doi:10.1007/JHEP08
(2016)098.
[35] N. Gubernari, M. Reboud, D. van Dyk, J. Virto, Dispersive analysis of B →K(∗)
and Bs →ϕ form factors, JHEP 12 (2023) 153, [Erratum: JHEP 01, 125 (2025)].
arXiv:2305.06301, doi:10.1007/JHEP12(2023)153.
[36] N. Gubernari, A. Kokulu, D. van Dyk, B →P and B →V Form Factors from B-Meson
Light-Cone Sum Rules beyond Leading Twist, JHEP 01 (2019) 150. arXiv:1811.00983,
doi:10.1007/JHEP01(2019)150.
[37] R. R. Horgan, Z. Liu, S. Meinel, M. Wingate, Lattice QCD calculation of form factors
describing the rare decays B →K∗ℓ+ℓ−and Bs →ϕℓ+ℓ−, Phys. Rev. D 89 (9) (2014)
094501. arXiv:1310.3722, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.89.094501.
[38] R. R. Horgan, Z. Liu, S. Meinel, M. Wingate, Rare B decays using lattice QCD form
factors, PoS LATTICE2014 (2015) 372. arXiv:1501.00367, doi:10.22323/1.214.0
372.
[39] P. Ball, R. Zwicky, Bd,s →ρ, ω, K∗, ϕ decay form-factors from light-cone sum rules
revisited, Phys. Rev. D 71 (2005) 014029. arXiv:hep-ph/0412079, doi:10.1103/Ph
ysRevD.71.014029.
[40] P. Ball, R. Zwicky, |Vtd/Vts| from B →V γ, JHEP 04 (2006) 046. arXiv:hep-ph/0603
232, doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2006/04/046.
[41] S. Navas, et al., Review of particle physics, Phys. Rev. D 110 (3) (2024) 030001.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.110.030001.
49
[42] M. Czaja, M. Misiak, Current status of the standard model prediction for the Bs -> µ+
µ−branching ratio (2024). arXiv:2407.03810.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.03810
[43] P. Gambino, C. Schwanda, Inclusive semileptonic fits, heavy quark masses, and Vcb, Phys.
Rev. D 89 (1) (2014) 014022. arXiv:1307.4551, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.89.014022.
[44] M. Misiak, M. Steinhauser, NNLO QCD corrections to the anti-B —> X(s) gamma
matrix elements using interpolation in m(c), Nucl. Phys. B 764 (2007) 62–82. arXiv:
hep-ph/0609241, doi:10.1016/j.nuclphysb.2006.11.027.
[45] W. Altmannshofer, D. M. Straub, New physics in b →s transitions after LHC run 1,
Eur. Phys. J. C 75 (8) (2015) 382. arXiv:1411.3161, doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-0
15-3602-7.
[46] W. G. Parrott, C. Bouchard, C. T. H. Davies, B →K and D →K form factors from
fully relativistic lattice QCD, Phys. Rev. D 107 (1) (2023) 014510. arXiv:2207.12468,
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.107.014510.
[47] The CKM Matrix and the Unitarity Triangle. Proceedings, Workshop13-16 Feb 2002
CERN, Geneva, Switzerland,, CERN Yellow Reports: Conference Proceedings. arXiv:
hep-ph/0304132, doi:10.5170/CERN-2003-002-corr.
[48] G. Isidori, R. Unterdorfer, On the short-distance constraints from KL,S →µ+µ−, JHEP
01 (2004) 009. arXiv:hep-ph/0311084, doi:10.1088/1126-6708/2004/01/009.
[49] M. Antonelli, V. Cirigliano, G. Isidori, F. Mescia, M. Moulson, H. Neufeld, E. Passemar,
M. Palutan, B. Sciascia, M. Sozzi, R. Wanke, O. P. Yushchenko, An evaluation of
|v us | and precise tests of the standard model from world data on leptonic and
semileptonic kaon decays, The European Physical Journal C 69 (3-4) (2010) 399–424.
doi:10.1140/epjc/s10052-010-1406-3.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-010-1406-3
[50] J. Brod, M. Gorbahn, E. Stamou, Two-loop electroweak corrections for the k →πνν
decays, Physical Review D 83 (3) (Feb. 2011). doi:10.1103/physrevd.83.034030.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.83.034030
[51] F. Mescia, C. Smith, Improved estimates of rare k decay matrix elements from Kℓ3
decays, Physical Review D 76 (3) (Aug. 2007). doi:10.1103/physrevd.76.034017.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevD.76.034017
[52] W. Detmold, S. Meinel, Λb →Λℓ+ℓ−form factors, differential branching fraction, and
angular observables from lattice QCD with relativistic b quarks, Phys. Rev. D 93 (7)
(2016) 074501. arXiv:1602.01399, doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.93.074501.
50
