Dense-Sparse Dynamic Time Warping for Customizing Piano
Concerto Accompaniments
TJ Tsai
Harvey Mudd College
Claremont, CA USA
ttsai@g.hmc.edu
Kavi Dey
Harvey Mudd College
Claremont, CA USA
kdey@g.hmc.edu
Yigitcan ¨Ozer
International Audio Laboratories
Erlangen, Germany
yigitcan.oezer@audiolabs-erlangen.de
Meinard M¨uller
International Audio Laboratories
Erlangen, Germany
meinard.mueller@audiolabs-erlangen.de
Abstract—In this study, we explore how pianists can customize Music
Minus One (MMO) concerto accompaniments to match their playing
style. Bypassing the need for a symbolic score, often not available digitally,
we use three types of audio data: solo piano recordings, MMO orchestra-
only recordings, and mixed recordings of both piano and orchestra (e.g.,
from YouTube). The mixed recording serves as an intermediary reference
to align the solo and orchestra parts, with only the orchestral part
being adjusted through time-scale modification to synchronize with the
user’s playing. The main challenge with estimating these alignments is
the spectral mismatch between recordings containing different musical
parts. Motivated by this application scenario, we introduce Dense-Sparse
DTW, a variant of Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) that is designed
to improve robustness of alignments to spectral mismatch by focusing
on aligning a selected subset of audio frames containing prominent
timing cues. We collect and annotate data from four piano concerto
movements and establish a framework for generating and evaluating
customized accompaniment recordings. On this benchmark, we show that
Dense-Sparse DTW has better or comparable performance than more
complex approaches based on source separation and spectral subtraction
techniques.
Index Terms—dynamic time warping, alignment, spectral mismatch.
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper explores an application in which a pianist can modify
a Music Minus One recording to match their playing style. Music
Minus One (MMO) is a company that sells recordings of the
accompaniment part (only) of classical, jazz, and popular music, so
that a musician can play their part with accompaniment. One of
the drawbacks of MMO is that the musician has no control over
the accompaniment recording. In this work, we explore an offline
accompaniment generation task in which an existing MMO recording
is modified to match the user’s playing.
Automatic musical accompaniment has a rich history of study that
extends several decades (e.g. see [1]–[6] for representative samples).
For non-improvised music, previous work generally assumes that the
accompaniment system has access to a musical score in a symbolic
format like MIDI. However, for certain genres of music (such as
piano concertos), symbolic scores are not widely available and are
very time-consuming to create.
In this work, we explore a paradigm for automated piano concerto
accompaniment in which a symbolic score is not needed. Instead, we
assume that we only have access to three forms of audio data: (1)
recordings of the user’s piano playing without any orchestral accom-
paniment (which we refer to as the piano-only recording or Puser),
(2) an MMO recording containing the orchestral accompaniment part
only (which we refer to as the orchestra-only recording or Oacc), and
© 2025 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from
IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional
purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
(3) a complete recording containing both piano and orchestra such as
one might find on Youtube (which we refer to as the mix recording
or Mref). Mref serves as an intermediary reference to facilitate the
alignment between Puser and Oacc. In a sense, Mref takes over the
role of the “score” which specifies both the piano and orchestra parts.
Given this formulation, Figure 1 shows a straightforward blueprint
for customizing an MMO recording: estimate the Puser–Mref and
Mref–Oacc alignments, use these estimates to infer the Puser–Oacc
alignment, and then time-scale modify Oacc to produce Ouser that is
synchronous to Puser.
The biggest challenge in estimating these alignments is the spectral
mismatch between Mref, Puser, and Oacc (since each contains
different musical parts). One could approach this problem in a number
of ways using existing techniques: (a) simply ignore the spectral
mismatch and estimate the alignments using standard dynamic time
warping (DTW), (b) apply source separation to Mref to estimate the
piano and orchestra components (e.g. [7], [8]), and then align the esti-
mated components against Puser and Oacc, or (c) align the dominant
soloist part (Puser) against Mref, subtract its spectral components
from Mref’s spectrogram, and then align the modified spectrogram
against Oacc (e.g. [9]). In the process of trying these approaches, we
discovered a surprisingly simple yet effective approach.
The key insight is that by focusing only on aligning selected audio
frames that contain prominent timing cues, we can reduce the impact
of spectral mismatch on the estimated alignment. For example, the
orchestra part often contains rests or silences in which the soloist
plays alone. If one tries to align these regions of silence in Oacc
against Mref, the spectral mismatch will lead to noisy alignments. If,
however, we ignore temporal regions (like silence) in Oacc that lack
prominent timing cues, we can focus on aligning the more “robust”
parts and simply use linear interpolation in the less “robust” regions.
We propose a variant of DTW called Dense-Sparse DTW (DS-DTW)
that aligns selected elements from one sequence (the “sparsified”
sequence) against another (dense) sequence.
DS-DTW fits into a broad corpus of work on DTW as a tool for
alignment. Works in this area generally fall into one of two groups.
The first group focuses on reducing the quadratic computation and
memory costs of DTW. Some works speed up exact DTW through the
use of lower bounds [10], early abandoning [11], or specialized hard-
ware [12]. Other works approximate DTW by imposing allowable
bands in the cost matrix [13], [14], estimating alignments at multiple
resolutions [15], [16], or working with a fixed amount of memory
[17]. For sparse time series data, several methods have been proposed
to speed up exact or approximate DTW [18], [19]. The second group
focuses on extending the behavior of DTW in some way. Examples
in music processing include handling repeats and jumps [20], [21],
performing alignment in an online setting [22], [23], handling partial
alignments [24], using multiple performances to improve alignment
arXiv:2607.18189v1  [cs.SD]  20 Jul 2026
Fig. 1.
Overview of a system for customizing concerto accompaniments.
Puser is the user’s piano playing, Oacc is a Music Minus One recording of
the orchestra part, Mref is a mix recording (e.g., from Youtube), and Ouser
is the customized orchestral accompaniment.
accuracy [25], and handling pitch drift in a capella music [26]. DS-
DTW falls into the second group, with an emphasis on improving
the robustness of alignments to spectral mismatch.
This paper has two main contributions. First, we collect a set of
data that allows for systematic study of a score-free paradigm for
automated piano concerto accompaniment (Section II). This dataset
involved selecting MMO and mix recordings, recruiting pianists to
record performances of selected concerto movements, and annotating
the timestamps of measure downbeats in the collected recordings.
Using this data, we designed a benchmark framework for assessing
the alignment accuracy of an adaptive concerto accompaniment
system. Our framework is designed to allow for systematic study of
both offline and online concerto accompaniment generation, though
in this initial study we focus only on the offline task. Our data,
benchmark framework, and code are all open source except for the
MMO recordings.1 As our main technical contribution, we introduce
a novel offline alignment algorithm called Dense-Sparse DTW, which
is designed to improve the robustness of alignments to spectral
mismatch by focusing on selected audio frames (Section III). We
show that this algorithm leads to comparable or better performance
than other systems based on standard alignment, source separation,
and spectral subtraction techniques (Section IV).
II. BENCHMARK DESIGN
In this section we describe the audio and score data, data pre-
processing, and evaluation methodology in our benchmark.
A. Audio Data
The benchmark contains three types of audio: orchestra-only
(Oacc), piano-only (Puser), and mix (Mref) recordings.
Oacc recordings. The orchestra recordings consist of four concerto
movements from the Music Minus One catalog shown in Table I.
Our entire framework is open source except for these orchestra
recordings. We annotated the Oacc recordings with timestamps of
measure downbeats. These timestamps serve as reference instances
in order to evaluate alignment accuracy.
Puser recordings. The piano-only recordings were collected by
recruiting pianists to perform the concerto movements (one pianist
per movement). The pianists were asked to play along to the
Oacc recordings, so that their playing would be synchronized. The
1https://github.com/HMC-MIR/PianoConcertoAccompaniment
TABLE I
OVERVIEW OF THE AUDIO DATA IN THE CONCERTO ACCOMPANIMENT
BENCHMARK.
Concerto Movement
#P
#O
#M
Total Dur
Rachmaninov No 2, Op 18, Mov 1
1
1
2
0:43:32
Mozart No 21, K467, Mov 1
1
1
2
0:52:42
Beethoven No 1, Op 15, Mov 1
1
1
2
1:01:30
Bach No 5, BWV 1056, Mov 1
1
1
2
0:13:21
Total
4
4
8
2:51:05
pianists listened to the accompaniment tracks on headphones while
performing and recording the soloist part on an acoustic piano.2
Mref recordings. The mix recordings are taken from the IMSLP
website.3 We found two recordings for each concerto, which ranged
in quality from historic performances to performances by university
students. Because measure annotations are time-consuming to create,
we only annotated measure downbeats for one selected mix recording
from each concerto movement. These annotations help diagnose how
much of the Puser–Oacc alignment error is coming from the Puser–
Mref alignment versus the Mref–Oacc alignment.
Table I summarizes the audio data in our benchmark, which we
call the Concerto Accompaniment Benchmark. We note that this
data collection is distinct from the recently released Piano Concerto
Dataset (PCD) [27]. The PCD consists of short 12-second excerpts
to facilitate the study of piano–orchestra source separation, whereas
our data set consists of entire movements to facilitate the study of
alignment and accompaniment generation.
B. Score Data
The benchmark requires score annotations for evaluation purposes
(only). Since extended silence has an ambiguous ground truth align-
ment, we only evaluate alignment accuracy when both piano and
orchestra are active. These considerations are described below.
Terminology. The sheet music score consists of a sequence of
measures, where each measure is further subdivided into beats. We
define a piano run as a contiguous sequence of beats in which the
piano part is active. Because the piano part has rests of various
duration, we consider the piano part to be active as long as rests
are two measures or less in duration. We can partition the beats in
which the piano part is active into a set of non-overlapping piano
runs of maximal duration, which we call piano chunks.
Score annotations. For each concerto movement, we found one
sheet music PDF from IMSLP and annotated it in two ways. First, we
partition the score into piano chunks and annotate the corresponding
measure numbers. The number of piano chunks in the Rachmaninoff,
Mozart, Beethoven, and Bach movements was 4, 5, 5, and 1,
respectively. Second, we identify the measures which should be used
to evaluate alignment accuracy. We only evaluate alignment accuracy
on measures where both piano and orchestra are active.
C. Data Pre-Processing
Several additional preprocessing steps were carried out to prepare
the data for experimentation.
2Note that, even though the Puser and Oacc recordings are already
synchronized by design, they are never directly aligned – we compute the
Puser–Mref and Oacc–Mref alignments (which are nontrivial) to infer the
Puser–Oacc alignment. We chose to record the piano parts in this way to
enable us to study other formulations involving source separation.
3https://imslp.org/
Query Generation. We define a query Pquery to be an audio
recording of the user playing a single piano chunk. In Figure 1,
the query is the input to the accompaniment generation system.
Because we had limited data, we performed data augmentation by
considering time-scale modified versions of each query. Time-scale
modification (TSM) is a technique for changing the tempo of a
musical recording without changing its pitch. We performed TSM
using the method described in [28] based on harmonic-percussive
source separation. We used the set of logarithmically symmetric TSM
factors {0.8, 0.9, 1, 1.11, 1.25}.
Scenario Generation. We define a scenario to be a tuple of three
audio recordings: a piano only Puser = Pquery recording of a single
piano chunk, an orchestra only recording Oacc of the entire piece,
and a mix recording Mref of the entire piece. We consider all possible
combinations of Pquery, Oacc, and Mref recordings. In total, there
are 150 scenarios in the benchmark.
D. Evaluation
The quality of the generated concerto accompaniment recording
depends on both objective and subjective factors. In our initial frame-
work, we focus on the part of system performance that can be mea-
sured objectively: alignment accuracy. We measure this by comparing
the estimated Pquery–Oacc alignment against the annotated downbeat
timestamps. At each annotated downbeat in Pquery, we calculate
the alignment error between the estimated and annotated locations
in Oacc. We characterize system performance on each concerto
movement as an error rate indicating the percentage of alignment
errors larger than a fixed error tolerance, where we consider a range
of error tolerances. We then aggregate system performance across the
benchmark by averaging the error rates on each movement.4
III. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
In this section we give an overview of our proposed approach and
describe the Dense-Sparse DTW alignment algorithm.
A. Overview
The
overall
approach
to
aligning
piano-only
(Pquery)
and
orchestra-only recordings (Oacc) is to use a mix recording (Mref)
(containing both piano and orchestra parts) as an intermediary rep-
resentation. There are three steps to this process. First, we align
Pquery with Mref using subsequence DTW with chroma features and
cosine distance metric. Subsequence DTW is a variant of DTW that
finds the optimal alignment between a short query sequence and any
subsequence within a reference sequence [29]. We allow for step
size transitions of {(1,1), (1,2), (2,1)} with multiplicative transition
weights 1, 1, 2, respectively, which assumes that the tempos in the
recordings differ by a factor of two at most. By using the piano-only
chunk as the query, we can identify the matching region of the mix
recording. Even though there is a spectral mismatch between Pquery
and Mref, we find experimentally that this simple method yields
fairly reliable alignments due to the fact that the soloist piano part is
dominant in the mix recording and contains frequent alignment cues
(like note onsets). Second, we align Oacc with Mref using Dense-
Sparse Dynamic Time Warping (DS-DTW). Unlike the piano part,
the orchestral part is not dominant in the mix recording and often
contains rests and silences, which results in a much more severe
spectral mismatch between Oacc and Mref. This motivates the need
for an alignment approach like DS-DTW that is more robust in such
4This weights each concerto movement equally. Some movements are much
longer than others (e.g., 16 min for Beethoven vs 3.5 min for Bach), so this
ensures that no one movement dominates the benchmark due to its duration.
Fig. 2.
Visualization of DS-DTW for aligning a sparse sequence (selected
orchestra chroma features, vertical axis) against a dense sequence (mix
chroma features, horizontal axis). During dynamic programming, there are
two different modes of operation: dense matching (blue) and sparse matching
(orange).
scenarios. Third, we use the estimated Pquery–Mref and Mref–Oacc
alignments to infer the Pquery–Oacc alignment.
B. Dense-Sparse DTW
DS-DTW estimates the alignment between a dense sequence
and selected elements from another sequence that contain useful
alignment cues (the “sparsified” sequence). In our application, we
use DS-DTW to align the mix features (m1,. . . , mN) and selected
elements from the orchestra features (a subset of o1,. . . , oK). The
algorithm has four main steps.
The first step is feature selection. This is done in three substeps.
Given the orchestra features o1, o2, . . . , oK where ot ∈Rd (in our
case, chroma features), the first step is to compute the flux ft ∈R at
each time index t, calculated as ft = ||ot −ot+1||1. The second step
is to select a threshold τ for deciding which features to keep. The
intuition here is that if the feature vector is not changing, there is no
benefit in performing a dense alignment. To select the threshold, we
define the desired fraction γ of features to keep, and then select τ to
ensure that L ≈γ · K feature vectors have flux values higher than
τ. The third step is to select all features ot1, ot2, . . . , otL whose
flux values satisfy fti > τ, i ∈{1, . . . , L} where 1 ≤t1 < t2 <
· · · < tL ≤K. In addition, we also compute the gap lengths between
adjacent selected feature vectors gi = ti+1 −ti, i ∈{1, . . . , L −1}.
The second step is to compute the pairwise cost matrix C ∈RL×N
between ot1,. . . , otL and m1,. . . , mN. This is done using a cosine
distance metric. Note that this matrix indicates pairwise costs between
the selected orchestra features and all of the mix features.
The third step is to compute a cumulative cost matrix D ∈RL×N
and backtrace matrix B ∈ZL×N using dynamic programming. We
initialize D[1, :] = C[1, :], which allows the alignment path to begin
anywhere in the mix recording. We also initialize D[i, 1] = ∞,
i > 1. As with standard DTW, D[i, j] indicates the cumulative
path cost of the optimal path up to and including position (i, j).
However, unlike standard DTW, DS-DTW has two different modes of
operation: one mode for handling dense alignments (blue squares in
Figure 2) and one mode for handling gaps (orange squares in Figure
2). To determine which mode to use when calculating D[i, j], we
simply check the gap lengths of the previous two selected features,
TABLE II
COMPARING THE ALIGNMENT ACCURACY OF SEVERAL APPROACHES ON
THE PIANO CONCERTO ACCOMPANIMENT BENCHMARK. EACH NUMBER
INDICATES THE ERROR RATE (IN %) AT A FIXED ERROR TOLERANCE.
System
Error Tolerance
0.1s
0.2s
0.5s
1.0s
2.0s
Naive Pairwise DTW
53.9
32.2
12.9
5.1
2.7
Iterative Subtractive Alignment [9]
66.5
48.0
24.3
12.3
7.5
Separation + DTW (Spleeter) [7]
64.8
46.1
23.6
11.5
4.8
Separation + DTW (HDemucs) [8]
55.4
33.0
10.7
2.1
0.3
DS-DTW
53.1
29.9
10.0
2.9
0.6
i.e. gi−1 and gi−2. If gi−1 = 1 and gi−2 = 1, then we select the
dense matching mode and calculate D[i, j], i > 1, j > 1 using the
standard (subsequence) DTW formulation:5
D[i, j] = min





D[i −1, j −1] + 1 · C[i, j],
D[i −1, j −2] + 1 · C[i, j],
D[i −2, j −1] + 2 · C[i, j]





(1)
If gi−1̸ = 1 or gi−2̸ = 1, then we select the sparse matching mode
and calculate D[i, j], i > 1, j > 1 as:
D[i, j] = min

















D[i −1, j −2gi−1] + C[i, j],
D[i −1, j −2gi−1 + 1] + C[i, j],
D[i −1, j −2gi−1 + 2] + C[i, j],
. . .
D[i −1, j −
lgi−1
2
m
] + C[i, j]

















(2)
In other words, the sparse matching ignores the features in the gap
region but still enforces a maximum time warping factor of 2, to
be consistent with the dense matching mode. For example, position
D[4, 10] in Figure 2 considers the four possible transitions (1, 1),
(1, 2), (1, 3), and (1, 4), since the horizontal movement may vary
between
g3
2 = 1 and 2g3 = 4. As each entry D[i, j] is computed,
we also determine B[i, j], which simply indicates which of the entries
in equation (1) or (2) was selected.
The fourth step is to backtrace. Since we allow for subsequence
matches, we identify the endpoint by determining the minimum
element in the last row of D, i.e., argmin D[L, :]. We then follow
the backpointers in the backtrace matrix B to determine the optimal
path. There are two important things to note here. First, interpreting
the value of B[i, j] requires checking the gap length values gi−1 and
gi−2 to determine which mode (dense or sparse) was used. Second,
the coordinates in our cost matrix indicate the ordinal position among
the selected orchestra features, so we must map our cost matrix
coordinates to the position among the dense orchestra features.
IV. RESULTS
We compare the performance of five different systems on our
benchmark. The first system is a naive pairwise DTW approach. We
estimate the Pquery–Mref and Oacc–Mref alignments using subse-
quence DTW (with the same settings described in Section III-A).
We then use these alignments to infer the Pquery–Oacc alignment.
The second system is iterative subtractive alignment [9], which is
based on spectral subtraction. Here, the mix recording is aligned with
the piano-only recording, the estimated alignment is used to perform
spectral subtraction of the piano part from the mix, and the modified
5In both equation (1) and (2), all min candidates with invalid positions in
D (i.e., D[i, j] with i < 1 or j < 1) are simply ignored.
TABLE III
CHARACTERIZING THE EFFECT OF THE SPARSITY HYPERPARAMETER γ ON
THE PERFORMANCE OF DS-DTW. EACH NUMBER INDICATES ERROR RATE
(%) AT A FIXED ERROR TOLERANCE.
γ
Error Tolerance
0.1s
0.2s
0.5s
1.0s
2.0s
0.50
59.6
38.2
16.5
8.0
4.1
0.60
56.0
32.6
11.6
5.4
2.3
0.70
54.0
31.7
11.2
4.3
2.4
0.75
53.1
30.5
11.1
3.9
1.5
0.80
53.1
29.8
10.0
2.9
0.6
0.85
53.2
31.5
11.7
4.4
2.0
0.90
53.8
32.2
13.1
6.0
2.9
1.00
53.9
32.2
12.9
5.1
2.7
spectrogram of the mix is then aligned with the orchestra-only record-
ing. The third and fourth systems are based on source separation
(“Separation + DTW”). Here, source separation is performed on Mref
to estimate the piano component ˆPref and orchestra component ˆOref.
We then estimate the Pquery– ˆPref and Oacc– ˆOref alignments using
subsequence DTW, and use these to infer the Pquery–Oacc alignment.
We experiment with two different pretrained piano-orchestra source
separation models based on the U-Net architecture: one that models
the spectrogram only (“Spleeter”) [7] and another that models both
spectrogram and raw waveform (“HDemucs”) [8]. The fifth system
is our proposed DS-DTW algorithm. This approach is identical to
naive pairwise DTW but estimates the Mref–Oacc alignment using
DS-DTW with γ = 0.8.
Table II compares the alignment accuracy of all systems on our
benchmark. There are three things to notice about these results.
First, the effectiveness of a “source separation then align” approach
depends heavily on the quality of the source separation. We can
see that source separation with Spleeter yields much worse results
than naive pairwise DTW, whereas source separation with HDemucs
leads to much better results than naive pairwise DTW at coarser
error tolerances. In a similar vein, the ISA approach performs much
worse than naive pairwise DTW. Second, the DS-DTW approach has
consistently better performance than naive pairwise DTW, especially
at coarser error tolerances. For example, it reduces the error rate
from 2.7% to 0.6% at 2 sec tolerance (78% reduction in error
rate) and from 5.1% to 2.9% at 1 sec tolerance (43% reduction).
Third, the approach based on DS-DTW has the best performance at
low error tolerances and comparable results to HDemucs at coarser
error tolerances. The main benefit of DS-DTW is its competitive
performance with much less complexity than a source separation
approach. Whereas HDemucs requires training a specialized piano-
orchestra separation model, DS-DTW has no trainable parameters
(only one hyperparameter) and makes no hard assumptions about the
instrumentation (piano vs. violin concerto).
Table III compares performance of the DS-DTW approach across a
range of γ settings. Note that standard DTW is a special case of DS-
DTW with γ = 1.0. There are two things to notice about these results.
First, we can see that DS-DTW outperforms standard DTW (γ = 1.0)
across a range of γ settings, roughly between 0.6 and 1.0 for most
error tolerances. This indicates that standard DTW – considered as
a special case of DS-DTW – is not the optimal setting in many
situations. Second, we can see that tuning γ can lead to substantial
improvements at coarser error tolerances. For example, the error rate
with a 2 second error tolerance can be reduced from 2.7% to 0.6%
(78% reduction). This suggests that DS-DTW primarily improves
robustness to more “global” alignment issues. Intuitively, the optimal
γ will depend on characteristics of the audio. In future work, we plan
to explore ways to adaptively select γ at test-time.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No. 2144050. This work was also
funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German
Research Foundation) under Grant No. 500643750 (MU 2686/15-
1) and Grant No. 328416299 (MU 2686/10-2). The International
Audio Laboratories Erlangen are a joint institution of the Friedrich-
Alexander-Universit¨at Erlangen-N¨urnberg (FAU) and Fraunhofer In-
stitute for Integrated Circuits IIS.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Hidaka, M. Goto, and Y. Muraoka, “An automatic jazz accompaniment
system reacting to solo,” in Proceedings of the International Computer
Music Conference, 1995, pp. 167–170.
[2] C. Raphael, “A probabilistic expert system for automatic musical accom-
paniment,” Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, vol. 10,
no. 3, pp. 487–512, 2001.
[3] R. B. Dannenberg and C. Raphael, “Music score alignment and computer
accompaniment,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 38–43,
2006.
[4] C. Raphael, “Music plus one and machine learning,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2010, pp. 21–28.
[5] G. Xia and R. B. Dannenberg, “Improvised duet interaction: learning im-
provisation techniques for automatic accompaniment,” in International
Conference on New Interfaces for Musical Expression, 2017, pp. 110–
114.
[6] M. Pasini, M. Grachten, and S. Lattner, “Bass accompaniment generation
via latent diffusion,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Confer-
ence on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2024, pp.
1166–1170.
[7] Y. ¨Ozer and M. M¨uller, “Source separation of piano concertos with
test-time adaptation,” in Proc. of the International Society for Music
Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR), 2022, pp. 493–500.
[8] ——, “Source separation of piano concertos using musically motivated
augmentation techniques,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech,
and Language Processing, vol. 32, pp. 1214–1225, 2024.
[9] D. Yang, K. Ji, and T. Tsai, “Aligning unsynchronized part recordings
to a full mix using iterative subtractive alignment,” in Proc. of the Inter-
national Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR),
2021, pp. 810–817.
[10] Y. Zhang and J. Glass, “An inner-product lower-bound estimate for
dynamic time warping,” in Proc. of the International Conference on
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2011, pp. 5660–
5663.
[11] T. Rakthanmanon, B. Campana, A. Mueen, G. Batista, B. Westover,
Q. Zhu, J. Zakaria, and E. Keogh, “Searching and mining trillions of
time series subsequences under dynamic time warping,” in Proc. of the
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, 2012, pp. 262–270.
[12] Z. Wang, S. Huang, L. Wang, H. Li, Y. Wang, and H. Yang, “Accel-
erating subsequence similarity search based on dynamic time warping
distance with FPGA,” in Proceedings of the ACM/SIGDA International
Symposium on Field Programmable Gate Arrays, 2013, pp. 53–62.
[13] H. Sakoe and S. Chiba, “Dynamic programming algorithm optimization
for spoken word recognition,” IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech,
and Signal Processing, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 43–49, 1978.
[14] F. Itakura, “Minimum prediction residual principle applied to speech
recognition,” IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Pro-
cessing, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 67–72, 1975.
[15] M. M¨uller, H. Mattes, and F. Kurth, “An efficient multiscale approach to
audio synchronization,” in Proc. of the International Society for Music
Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR), 2006, pp. 192–197.
[16] S. Salvador and P. Chan, “FastDTW: Toward accurate dynamic time
warping in linear time and space,” in Proc. of the KDD Workshop on
Mining Temporal and Sequential Data, 2004.
[17] T. Pr¨atzlich, J. Driedger, and M. M¨uller, “Memory-restricted multiscale
dynamic time warping,” in Proc. of the IEEE International Conference
on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2016, pp. 569–
573.
[18] Y. Hwang and S. B. Gelfand, “Fast sparse dynamic time warping,” in
IEEE International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), 2022,
pp. 3872–3877.
[19] A. Mueen, N. Chavoshi, N. Abu-El-Rub, H. Hamooni, A. Minnich, and
J. MacCarthy, “Speeding up dynamic time warping distance for sparse
time series data,” Knowledge and Information Systems, vol. 54, pp. 237–
263, 2018.
[20] M. Grachten, M. Gasser, A. Arzt, and G. Widmer, “Automatic alignment
of music performances with structural differences,” in Proc. of the Inter-
national Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR),
2013.
[21] M. Shan and T. Tsai, “Improved handling of repeats and jumps in audio-
sheet image synchronization,” in Proc. of the International Society for
Music Information Retrieval Conference (ISMIR), 2020, pp. 62–69.
[22] S. Dixon, “Live tracking of musical performances using on-line time
warping,” in Proc. of the International Conference on Digital Audio
Effects, 2005, pp. 92–97.
[23] R. Macrae and S. Dixon, “Accurate real-time windowed time warping,”
in Proc. of the International Society for Music Information Retrieval
Conference (ISMIR), 2010, pp. 423–428.
[24] M. M¨uller and D. Appelt, “Path-constrained partial music synchroniza-
tion,” in Proc. of the International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and
Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2008, pp. 65–68.
[25] S. Wang, S. Ewert, and S. Dixon, “Robust and efficient joint alignment
of multiple musical performances,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio,
Speech, and Language Processing, vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 2132–2145, 2016.
[26] S. Waloschek and A. Hadjakos, “Driftin’ down the scale: Dynamic time
warping in the presence of pitch drift and transpositions,” in Proc. of
the International Society for Music Information Retrieval Conference
(ISMIR), 2018, pp. 630–636.
[27] Y. ¨Ozer, S. Schw¨ar, V. Arifi-M¨uller, J. Lawrence, E. Sen, and M. M¨uller,
“Piano concerto dataset (PCD): A multitrack dataset of piano concertos,”
Transaction of the International Society for Music Information Retrieval
(TISMIR), vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 75–88, 2023.
[28] J. Driedger, M. M¨uller, and S. Ewert, “Improving time-scale modification
of music signals using harmonic–percussive separation,” IEEE Signal
Processing Letters, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 105–109, 2014.
[29] M. M¨uller, Fundamentals of music processing: Using Python and
Jupyter notebooks.
Springer, 2021, vol. 2.
