Real-time THz ptychography using an optically modulated aperture
Diksha Garg,1, ∗Anil Kumar,2 Nicholas E. Grant,2 John D. Murphy,2, 3
John E. Cunningham,4 Nick Stone,1 Euan Hendry,1 and Harry Penketh1, †
1Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QL, UK.
2School of Engineering, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK.
3School of Engineering, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.
4School of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK.
Ptychography allows ordinary cameras to perform both quantitative phase and intensity imag-
ing. However, the requirement for relative object to probe motion and high measurement count
significantly limits imaging speed and application scope. In this work, we introduce optically mod-
ulated aperture ptychography, using a silicon photomodulator as a rapidly reconfigurable aperture,
deployable across the microwave, millimeter wave and terahertz bands. We demonstrate experimen-
tally at ∼0.1 THz real-time ptychographic image capture, without moving parts. Furthermore,
a reconfigurable aperture facilitates diverse and spatially multiplexed probes.
We use a multi-
plexed known-probe reconstruction strategy that improves signal-to-noise ratio and increases the
information content per measurement, enabling the capture of fluid dynamics at 16 fps. Our opti-
cal modulation approach enables high-throughput ptychographic imaging of dynamic samples, for
applications such as non-destructive evaluation and in-vivo biomedical imaging.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Standard cameras typically capture only the intensity
of an electromagnetic field and therefore record incom-
plete information about a scene. Techniques such as dig-
ital holography [1] and coherent diffractive imaging [2]
provide the means to retrieve the missing phase compo-
nent, enabling lensless imaging [3], aberration removal
[4], and high contrast imaging of dielectric samples [5].
Ptychography is a leading coherent diffractive imaging
method, demonstrated across several spectral bands [6].
When compared with holography it offers a much simpler
experimental implementation without a reference beam,
at the expense of imaging speed [7–9].
In conventional scanning ptychography, object phase is
reconstructed from diffraction patterns recorded at over-
lapping illumination positions in the object plane [10]. A
physical aperture is often used to localize the illumination
beam, while the object is moved to generate the overlap-
ping positions. Fly-scanning ptychography is a variant
in which continuous motion of the object is used, reduc-
ing delays caused by object acceleration and deceleration
between measurements [11]. However, the relative move-
ment of the object across the illumination still imposes
a mechanical restriction on imaging speeds, as hundreds
to thousands of diffraction patterns are typically needed.
Several multiplexed aperture techniques have been
demonstrated which reduce the number of diffraction
patterns required for reconstruction [12–16].
However,
these approaches still require object scanning and are
sensitive to artifacts due to the interference between
apertures.
Another popular ptychographic approach,
Fourier ptychography, addresses these limitations to
∗d.garg@exeter.ac.uk
† h.penketh2@exeter.ac.uk
some extent by replacing object motion with a chang-
ing illumination angle [17, 18]. Indeed, real-time Fourier
ptychography has been demonstrated in the visible spec-
tral region by using reconfigurable LED arrays to rapidly
scan illumination angle [17–19].
Whilst microscopy at visible wavelengths has ben-
efited substantially from ptychographic augmentation,
ptychography in other frequency bands is underdevel-
oped.
In particular, the problematic mm-wave and
terahertz (THz) bands, in-between the more developed
infrared and microwave spectral regions, could bene-
fit enormously from the unrealized potential in ptycho-
graphic imaging. Due to the transparency of most non-
polar dielectrics in the THz region, it has great promise
for label-free, safe and non-destructive imaging across
a wide range of applications [20]. The high sensitivity
of THz radiation to material hydration also makes it a
promising tool for differentiating normal from cancerous
tissues in biomedical imaging [21].
Simple demonstrations of THz ptychography have
been realized [22, 23], and the straightforward imple-
mentation when compared to two-beam holographic sys-
tems [24, 25] may be a key facilitator of translation from
the laboratory to diverse end-users. Real-time THz pty-
chography could enable, for example, high throughput
non-destructive evaluation, monitoring of concealed fluid
dynamics and in-vivo biological observation. However,
there is no available analog to a reconfigurable LED ar-
ray in this frequency range, and imaging times remain
a central challenge. Thus, despite many prospective ap-
plications, real-time ptychography has not been demon-
strated in this spectral region. In this work, we overcome
the limitations of scanning ptychography imposed by the
requirement for physical movement by utilizing an opti-
cally modulated spatial light modulator (SLM). The pro-
posed SLM-based approach enables localized modulation
of THz transmission through a silicon wafer and forms an
optically controlled THz aperture between photoexcited
arXiv:2607.17796v1  [physics.optics]  20 Jul 2026
2
and non-excited regions. In this configuration, the over-
lapping scan positions can be realized by changing the
optical illumination. Rapidly scanning the aperture, in
place of moving the object to be imaged, yields a step
change in accessible imaging speed applicable across the
mm-wave and THz bands. Furthermore, such a reconfig-
urable aperture opens up a swathe of opportunities for
spatial multiplexing within the probe function, which re-
duces the number of necessary diffraction measurements
and further improves imaging speed. Leveraging this, we
demonstrate real-time ptychographic imaging, capturing
fluid dynamics in a sample at 16 fps.
II.
METHOD
A.
Conventional scanning ptychography
In standard scanning ptychography, the illumination
is shaped into a spatially localized probe P(r), typically
via beam focusing or with a static aperture. This con-
finement ensures that the measured diffraction intensity
varies with the relative motion between the probe and
object O(r). In the optical regime, it is common for the
probe to remain fixed whilst the object is translated to
scan position rn, yet it is conventional to describe the
exit wave from the probed object as [26]
ψn(r) = P(r −rn) O(r)
(1)
and the measured intensity at a downstream camera as
In(q) = |Pz {Ψn(rn)} |2,
(2)
where Pz is the diffraction propagator between object
and detector planes, with the latter described by posi-
tion vector q. Unlike in optical ptychography where Pz
would usually be the Fourier transform, at THz frequen-
cies the detector typically sits in the Fresnel diffraction
zone, which can be modeled using the angular spectrum
method [27]. Eqs. 1 and 2 describe the forward model
for ptychography.
For a sequence of N overlapping scan positions such
that each point on the object is probed at least twice, the
unknown complex valued object can be reconstructed it-
eratively using established ptychographic solvers such as
ePIE [28] and RAAR [29]. If the probe overlap is greater,
the additional redundancy facilitates robust retrieval of
both the object O(r) and unknown probe P(r), in so
called blind ptychography.
See ref.
[30, 31] for an in
depth discussion of phase retrieval algorithms for pty-
chography.
B.
Optically modulated aperture ptychography
The critical innovation of this work is the application
of a dynamic photo-reconfigurable aperture created using
a silicon photomodulator. The photomodulator is illumi-
nated with spatially patterned visible light, which mod-
ifies the local conductivity of the photomodulator and
consequently, the transmission of the THz beam pass-
ing through it. Regions exposed to visible light strongly
attenuate THz transmission, while non-illuminated ar-
eas allow the THz radiation to pass, thereby creating a
structured probe. To induce sufficient photoconductivity
to render photo-excited regions opaque, it is necessary to
passivate the surfaces of the silicon wafer, a process that
increases the effective lifetime of photogenerated charge
carriers, which can be tuned from µs to ms (see exper-
imental details section D) [32]. Passivation reduces the
required visible photoexcitation intensity and enables the
use of safe, low-cost continuous wave visible light sources
such as LEDs. For this study, we choose two different
modulators with carrier lifetimes of ∼4 ms and ∼1 ms
(Supplementary Fig. S2), the latter permitting a faster
measurement rate.
Fig. 1 (a) illustrates the concept, with the example of
imaging a Siemens star located behind the photomod-
ulator. The incident THz beam is expanded to match
the modulation area, which is given by the extent of the
illumination by visible light. By introducing a transpar-
ent aperture (a region without illumination) we can de-
fine a local THz probe region, as shown in Fig. 1 (a).
The position of the aperture may be optically updated
to new probe positions rn using a digital micromirror de-
vice (DMD), which is capable of running at kHz rates.
Here we tune the rate at which we update the aperture
position to the lifetime of the modulator and the camera
frame rate. As there are no moving parts in this imple-
mentation and the object is static, the imaging field of
view is limited by the detector size and distance. Mimick-
ing the traditional scanning ptychography approach, we
raster scan a transparent square within our photomod-
ulator (of size 26 mm × 26 mm) across the modulation
area in a regular 2D grid of 9 mm step size. This leads to
a linear overlap ratio of 65 percent. In results section 3B,
we explore the advantages of alternative probing strate-
gies.
C.
Known-probe reconstruction algorithm
As our probe function P(r) can no longer be consid-
ered fixed for all measurements, we adapt the standard
ptychographic formulation for the exit wave to
ψn(r) = Pn(r) O(r).
(3)
This allows us to use a standard ptychographic iterative
algorithm, in this case PIE [33], in which we only solve
for the unknown object O(r). The probe is treated as a
known input, which in our case updates according to the
optical projection sequence and photomodulator carrier
dynamics.
In practice, due to imperfect passivation, the carrier
lifetime will vary slightly across the modulator (see Sup-
3
FIG. 1. Principle of optically modulated aperture ptychography. (a) Spatially structured optical illumination is projected onto
a silicon wafer to form a transient aperture for the incident THz beam. The transmitted THz radiation interacts with the
object placed behind the wafer, producing a diffraction pattern from the localized region. (b) Measured reduction in the THz
transmission (modulation depth) through a white light illuminated 380 µm thick passivated silicon wafer at varying illumination
intensities. (c) Numerically simulated reconstruction from a sequence of aperture positions, forming a complex-valued object
with uniform intensity (brightness) and spatially varying phase (color) as shown in the inset.
plementary Fig. S1). Thus, we favour a reconstruction
approach in which the probe spatio-temporal dynamics
are first measured experimentally and then used to de-
fine a dynamic probe during reconstruction. The probe
sequence Pn(r) is measured by removing the object and
placing the camera immediately behind the photomodu-
lator. Since this measurement only constrains the inten-
sity of the probe sequence, we assume a spatially uniform
phase profile across the modulator plane (r). In practice,
this imparts local phase curvature, derived from the di-
vergence of the THz beam, into the object response O(r),
which can then be removed by a one time no-object nor-
malization. With this assumption, the probe intensity
sequence and a random object guess are input into an
adapted PIE algorithm [34] following the Eq. 3 formula-
tion. We use 100 iterations for image reconstruction, and
300 iterations for later video reconstructions in Fig. 4.
D.
Experimental details
We perform our experimental demonstration with a
continuous wave, 95 GHz, 180 mW IMPATT-diode
source (TeraSense). This source flood-illuminates our sil-
icon photomodulator, 5 mm behind which is placed the
object to be imaged. Our detector, a Tera-4096 64 × 64
pixel, 1.5 mm pitch array formed from GaAs high mo-
bility heterostructures (TeraSense) is positioned 50 mm
behind the object and along the optical axis. An anno-
tated photograph of the experimental system is provided
in the Supplementary Fig. S3.
To generate the reconfigurable THz aperture, pat-
terned visible light is encoded with a DLP7000 (Vialux)
DMD, which has a maximum refresh rate exceeding
20 kHz.
White light illumination is provided by an
SLS605 liquid light guide coupled xenon arc lamp (Thor-
labs). The THz and visible beams are combined on axis
by reflecting the THz off a 1.2 mm thick, 45◦quartz
beamsplitter, which is optically transparent. The illumi-
nation intensity at the photomodulator is 200 W/m2 for
imaging. Later, we increase this illumination intensity to
490 W/m2 for video-rate capture.
We use two photomodulators in this work. The first,
used for imaging of static objects, is a 150 mm diame-
ter, high resistivity (>7000 Ωcm) silicon wafer that has
undergone surface passivation through Al2O3 deposition
following Ref. [35], which gives a carrier lifetime of ∼
4 ms at 200 W/m2.
For this modulator, 200 W/m2
illumination results in near 100% modulation of trans-
mission, as shown in Fig. 1 (b). The thickness of this
modulator, 380 µm, is chosen from available stock to
give a Fabry-Perot resonance, with increased transmis-
sion, near our operating frequency (78 GHz and 95 GHz,
respectively). Later, for the high-speed imaging, we use
a different modulator (>10,000 Ωcm, 100 mm diameter
and 100 µm thickness) with a shorter lifetime of ∼1 ms
to allow video-rate capture. Further details on the photo-
modulator fabrication and characterization can be found
in Supplementary Section 1.
4
FIG. 2.
Complex reconstructed images of the Siemens
star generated using optically modulated (a) raster, and (b)
Hadamard probes. In these complex images, the colors rep-
resent phase values ranging from -π to π, while the bright-
ness indicates the relative intensity. (c) and (d) Intensity and
phase images of the 3D-printed dielectric object generated us-
ing the Hadamard basis, the colormaps are from Ref. [37].
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A.
Proof of concept
Exemplar imaging using an optically modulated aper-
ture is shown in Fig. 2 (a). This is a complex-valued im-
age of a metallic Siemens star, with colors representing
phase and brightness indicating the local field intensity.
For this we use a probe sequence of 8 × 8 overlapping
raster apertures, acquired with a camera frame rate of
45 fps. For each optical pattern, 12 continuous frames
are recorded over a time interval of 267 ms. For recon-
struction we use every 12th frame to ensure that carriers
generated by the previous pattern do not contribute to
measurement of the current pattern.
This produces a
64 × 64 × 64 pixel dataset or ptychogram, from 64
diffraction patterns recorded with a 64
×
64
pixels
camera in 17 seconds. Note that the measurement rate
is slower than the minimum required by the modulator
lifetime of ∼4 ms; data could therefore be acquired at a
higher rate. The image in Fig. 2 (a) is reconstructed and
normalized with a non-object reference (see Supplemen-
tary Fig. S4 for unnormalized reconstruction). Whilst
the resulting image is clearly identifiable as the Siemens
star, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is low. We attribute
this in part to the non-uniform spatial response of our
THz camera [36] and blinking hot-pixel clusters at low
signal counts (see Supplementary Fig. S5).
B.
Probe multiplexing
To improve the SNR and imaging speed further, we
leverage another key innovation afforded by our ap-
proach:
a reconfigurable aperture offers new possibil-
ities for spatial multiplexing.
Typically in ptychogra-
phy, a spatially multiplexed or multi probe approach re-
quires each aperture to be in some way separable in the
diffracted intensity, e.g. by position, wavelength or phase
encoding [15, 38]. This requirement for separability lim-
its the increase in throughput to a modest enhancement,
following the number of apertures [39, 40]. In this work,
however, we find that by using a known-probe sequence
and therefore reducing the number of unknowns to just
the object O(r), this constraint is relaxed.
In keeping with the known-probe sequence strategy
(Eq. 3), there is no requirement for separability between
multiplexed apertures within a single projection. There-
fore, we select our new probe basis to satisfy two crite-
ria: 50% transparency across the entire modulation area,
to maximize signal and throughput, and orthogonality
between projected probes Pn(r) to encourage even ob-
ject sampling. This leads us naturally to the Hadamard
basis. Unlike for the raster basis in which the individ-
ual aperture size must be larger than the sampling grid
spacing, in this case the overlap is provided by the mul-
tiplexed nature of the Hadamard basis, and each point
on the object is now probed N/2 times (N is the number
of projections). To generate projectable binary optical
patterns, the +1 and -1 entries in the Hadamard matrix
are mapped to 255 and 0 values to DMD pixels, defining
illuminated and non-illuminated apertures, respectively.
In Fig. 2 (b) we show that using the same acquisition
parameters as in (a) but with an 8 × 8 Hadamard projec-
tion basis, we obtain a notable SNR improvement. With
improved SNR, the resolution of our approach can be
evaluated using the Siemens star spoke separation. We
determine an object-plane resolution of 2.1±0.3 mm by
identifying the radius at which the target spokes meet the
Rayleigh criterion in field intensity (see Supplementary
Fig. S6). Additionally, we note that due to spatial mul-
tiplexing in the Hadamard case, the number of iterations
required for reconstruction may be significantly reduced
(see Supplementary Fig. S7).
The phase information retrieved from scanning pty-
chography is essential for propagating the diffraction
measurements to the object plane. Therefore, even an
intensity-only object, as in Fig. 2 (b), requires accurate
phase recovery to enable lensless reconstruction. How-
ever, the additional object phase images recovered have
far broader utility, particularly for evaluating dielectric
objects. In Fig.
2 (c) we show a normalized intensity-
only image of such a dielectric object - a 3D-printed ABS
50 mm× 50 mm× 5 mm block shown in the inset. Fig.
2 (d) is the corresponding phase-only image, in which
5
FIG. 3. Complex images of the Siemens star reconstructed
using varying number of random binary patterns: (a) 64, (b)
32, (c) 8 and (d) 4; in these complex images, the colors repre-
sent phase values ranging from -π to π, while the brightness
indicates the relative intensity.
small differences in optical path length manifest clear
changes in measured phase, revealing a hidden inclusion
with higher index in the form of the letter E. By invert-
ing the relationship between phase delay and refractive
index, the measured phase can be converted into a map
of effective refractive index, shown in Supplementary Fig.
S8. In S8, we show that the solved refractive distribution
follows the known variation in infill density from 20% to
100% for the surround and letter E, respectively.
C.
Video-rate imaging
The
optically
modulated
aperture
ptychography
demonstrated in Fig. 2 achieves at least an order of mag-
nitude reduction in measurement time relative to state-
of-the-art THz scanning ptychography [22]. Extending
this improvement to video-rate acquisition would unlock
the study of previously inaccessible dynamic phenomena
and rapidly evolving samples. In this section we intro-
duce our final innovation, in which we exploit the en-
hanced redundancy present in our spatially multiplexed
ptychograms to increase imaging speeds further.
In conventional scanning ptychography, each point on
the object must be sampled redundantly to enable stable
phase reconstruction. In our multiplexed scheme, com-
plete object coverage can be achieved using as few as
two binary projections. We investigate the effect of un-
dersampling our measurement basis by using fewer mea-
surements than are required for the raster-scanned case.
To do this, we first substitute our Hadamard projection
basis for random binary projections (in which 50% of
the apertures are randomly open within each pattern).
This removes any effects from the variation in spatial
frequency content from pattern to pattern.
Fig. 3 examines the effect of undersampling the pro-
jected patterns formed using an 8 × 8 grid of such ran-
domly distributed apertures. To minimize image noise
for undersampled reconstructions, these figures are pre-
sented without normalization and therefore the phase
curvature of the THz probe is visible. The fully sampled
reconstruction, Fig. 3 (a) is comparable to the Hadamard
case in Fig. 2 (b), despite the lack of basis orthogonality.
In Fig. 3 (b) the acquisition time is halved, with a modest
reduction in the fidelity of the intensity reconstruction.
As the number of optical patterns is reduced to 8 and 4
in (c) and (d) respectively, both intensity and phase fi-
delity continue to decrease, with phase diminishing more
rapidly. In (d), corresponding to just four projected pat-
terns, the object intensity response is recognizable but of
heavily compromised quality.
To achieve video-rate imaging, we first employ a pho-
tomodulator with a shorter carrier lifetime (∼1 ms),
enabling photoexcited masks to dissipate faster between
projections (see Supplementary Fig. S2 for wafer com-
parison). The illumination intensity is increased to 490
W/m2 to compensate for the reduced carrier density as-
sociated with the shorter carrier lifetime. Under these
conditions, the optical patterns are projected for a du-
ration of 2 camera frames (a minimum imposed by the
camera output trigger). At an increased camera frame
rate of 67 fps, this corresponds to 30 ms per pattern.
To improve reconstruction quality under highly un-
dersampled conditions, the spatiotemporal correlations
present in many real-world imaging applications can be
exploited. In our final demonstration in Fig. 4, we cap-
ture the motion of water droplets dispersed in mineral oil
at a camera acquisition rate of 67 fps.
To achieve high reconstruction frame rates with ac-
ceptable fidelity, we first generate a high fidelity recon-
struction of the static scene using 300 frames. We then
enter to a dynamic reconstruction mode, in which we up-
date using only the 2 most recent projections, with the
previous reconstruction supplied as the algorithm object
guess. In this way, we ensure the scene is quasi-static over
the reconstruction window (4 camera frames) and exploit
the similarity of subsequent reconstructions to obtain a
much higher fidelity image than that shown in Fig. 3 (d),
from fewer measurements (see Supplementary Table S1
for a summary of imaging times for each figure).
Supplementary Visualization 1 shows a real-time play-
back of the motion of colored water droplets dispersed in
oil. In Fig. 4, representative frames from Supplementary
Visualization 1 are shown. For improved visualization,
we display the field amplitude rather than the intensity
and a 3 × 3 × 3 spatiotemporal median filter is ap-
plied to the image sequence shown in Supplementary Vi-
sualization 1 (see Supplementary Visualization 2 for the
unfiltered version). The blue and pink dyes in the wa-
6
FIG. 4. Visualization of downward motion of the water droplets through an oil medium. (a) Top row, visual images of the
water-oil dynamic object at different times; the droplets are dyed in different colors to enhance visual contrast. Note that
the visual images are acquired off axis from the THz system. (b) Middle and (c) bottom row, corresponding reconstructed
amplitude and phase images. The scale bar in all images represents 1 cm. See Supplementary Visualization 1 for the continuous
droplet motion over a longer time interval.
ter drops are for visual distinction only, and correspond
to two isolated parallel cavities separated by ∼3 mm
along the optical axis (small enough to be inconsequen-
tial here). The slightly concave edges of the plastic con-
tainment vessel are visible left and right of the frames in
all the data. Note that the THz reconstructions in this
dataset are presented unnormalised to improve SNR. As
such, the quadratic phase curvature of the illuminating
beam can also be seen in the phase reconstructions.
In Fig. 4, the water droplets are identified by significant
reduction in transmission and a phase change relative to
the oil background. The downward motion of the water
droplets can be clearly tracked throughout the sequence,
including the subtle displacement observed between re-
constructed frames separated by only 60 ms, correspond-
ing to an effective reconstructed frame rate exceeding 16
fps. This demonstration highlights the potential for de-
tecting and tracking the presence of unwanted contam-
inants such as air bubbles and immiscible fluids in con-
cealed pipes under flow conditions, as just one example
of the many use cases unlocked by real-time THz pty-
chography.
IV.
CONCLUSION
We have demonstrated a novel approach to THz pty-
chographic imaging using an optically reconfigured aper-
ture.
Using this system-level innovation we forgo the
need for physical movement between the object and
aperture and demonstrate real-time complex field imag-
ing. Our silicon-based photomodulation approach is suit-
able for deployment across the millimeter-wave and THz
bands.
Furthermore, we exploit the massively paral-
lel nature of optical control to generate spatially multi-
plexed apertures for increased SNR and imaging through-
put, which we combine with temporal redundancy of the
scene to capture fluid dynamics at 16 fps. It should be
noted that the achieved imaging speed is constrained by
the camera acquisition speed and SNR, and not the sili-
con photomodulator. This imaging framework overcomes
the major limitation of mechanically scanned ptychogra-
phy and expands the scope of millimeter-wave and THz
imaging toward high-throughput, non-destructive eval-
uation of dielectric structures, as well as quantitative
phase imaging for biomedical applications.
7
FUNDING
D.G, A.K, J.D.M., J.E.C., N.S., E.H. and H.P. ac-
knowledge support from the Engineering and Physi-
cal Sciences Research Council via the Terabotics Pro-
gramme Grant (EP/V047914/1). EH and I.R.H. also ac-
knowledge support via the META4D Programme Grant
(EP/Y015673/1), and J.D.M via (EP/S036261/1).
DISCLOSURES
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The research data underlying this work will be made
openly available upon publication of the peer-reviewed
article.
8
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
This supplementary document provides additional in-
formation supporting the main manuscript,“Real-time
THz ptychography using an optically modulated aper-
ture”. It provides further details on the fabrication pro-
cess of the silicon photomodulator and a description of
the experimental setup. It also includes additional recon-
struction data and imaging performance evaluation.
Appendix A: Photomodulator
Two photomodulators are used in this work, both of
which are made by surface passivation of high resistivity
(100)-oriented silicon wafers. The wafers undergo a strin-
gent wet chemical clean, which is immediately followed
by transfer to the load lock of a Veeco Fiji G2 plasma-
enhanced atomic layer deposition (ALD) tool. Both sides
of the wafers are passivated with 20 nm Al2O3, deposited
by ALD at 200 ◦C using trimethylaluminium (TMA) and
O2 plasma as precursors. Following the Al2O3 deposi-
tion, the wafers are annealed in a quartz tube furnace for
30 min in air at 450 ◦C which increases the photogen-
erated charge carrier lifetime and modulation efficiency
[32]. Further details of the ALD process are described in
Ref. [35].
The lifetime uniformity of the 380 µm thick wafer is
evaluated by photoluminescence (PL) imaging using an
LED array (650 nm), and captured using an ANDOR
Apogee Alta F32 CCD camera cooled to -20 °C by a
chiller.
Fig. S1 shows the captured PL image of the
wafer, demonstrating the spatial variation in carrier life-
time across it.
Both wafers used in this study are fabricated using the
same process. However, owing to their differing thick-
nesses and variations in surface passivation quality, they
exhibit different carrier lifetimes as shown in Fig. S2 (a,
b). The effective carrier lifetime of each wafer is mea-
sured by the photoconductance decay method using Sin-
ton Instruments WCT-120PL lifetime system in transient
mode; the given values are averaged over 5 successive
measurements.
The effective carrier lifetime decreases
with increasing carrier density (illumination intensity)
which is attributed to enhanced Auger recombination at
high injection levels.
The difference in carrier lifetime between wafers di-
rectly influences the temporal switching response of the
wafers under optical illumination. Fig. S2 (c, d) shows
the normalized transmission of the THz beam with time
when optical excitation is applied and then removed. As
expected, the longer carrier lifetime (380 µm thick) wafer
in (c) exhibits slower switching times and a deeper mod-
ulation than the 100 µm thick wafer in (d). Note that
for significant modulation depths the switch on and off
times diverge from the effective lifetime as shown in (c)
[41]. For this reason the faster 100 µm thick modulator
is used for the video-rate demonstrations in this work.
Appendix B: Experimental setup
The annotated experimental setup, shown in Fig. S3
(a), consists of a 95 GHz source and a DMD (1024 × 768
pixels resolution) coupled to a visible light source. The
DMD generates structured optical patterns that are
transmitted through a beam splitter (BS) using a com-
mercial projection system. An additional plano-convex
lens L with a focal length of 175 mm is added ∼80 mm
after the projector aperture for the video rate demon-
strations in Fig. 4 of the main text, to increase the illu-
mination intensity. The 95 GHz beam is reflected by the
BS and combined with the structured visible light at the
silicon wafer. Sub-regions of the DMD are used to de-
fine the effective field of view, corresponding to 75 mm ×
75 mm for static imaging and 50 mm × 50 mm for video
measurements, respectively.
Each optical pattern con-
tains dark (unexposed) regions, forming a localized aper-
ture for the 95 GHz beam to illuminate the object. The
object is scanned by sequentially updating these optical
patterns. The camera is placed 50 mm away from the ob-
ject to capture the resulting diffraction patterns required
for the reconstruction. Camera acquisition triggers the
DMD to project the next pattern, which is controlled via
the LabVIEW environment.
Fig. S3 (b) illustrates the four example patterns out
of a total of 64 (arranged in an 8 × 8 grid) used for
raster scanning of the sample.
Here, the silicon wafer
is fully illuminated with optical light except for a small
square region, and the camera is placed directly behind
the silicon wafer without any object. The right column
of the figure shows the transmission of the THz beam
which is used to define the probe function.
Appendix C: Additional reconstruction results
This section provides information supporting the re-
sults shown in Fig. 2 in the main text.
1.
Unnormalized images
The unnormalized images of the Siemens star obtained
using raster and Hadamard bases are shown in Fig. S4.
The image reconstructed with raster scanning exhibits
a lower signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), with some measure-
ment noise attributed to the non-uniform and fluctuating
pixel response of the camera pixels, as illustrated in Fig.
S5. In both images, since a uniform probe phase is as-
sumed during reconstruction, the phase curvature of the
incident beam is mapped onto the reconstructed object.
This leads to the quadratic background color variation in
these unnormalised images.
9
FIG. S1. Photoluminescence image of the wafer with a thickness of 380 µm, showing the varying carrier lifetime throughout
the wafer.
FIG. S2. Effective carrier lifetime as a function of the minority carrier density for silicon wafers with thicknesses of (a) 380 µm
and (b) 100 µm, respectively. The dashed vertical lines indicate the corresponding values used in the paper. (c, d) Temporal
response of the normalized THz transmission under optical illumination for the 380 µm and 100 µm wafers, respectively. The
shaded area represents the time for which optical illumination was applied.
10
FIG. S3. (a) Annotated image of the experimental setup used to record ptychographic imaging data ; SW: silicon wafer, BS:
beam splitter, and L: lens. (b) Example of the four optically generated apertures captured by the camera, with corresponding
visible light patterns; these frames show the THz beam passing through a non-illuminated region. They were obtained by
positioning the camera just behind the silicon wafer and are used as probes for the reconstruction.
FIG. S4. Unnormalized reconstructions of the Siemens star acquired using (a) raster and (b) Hadamard bases, the quadratic
color variation shows the phase curvature of the incident THz beam.
2.
Spatial-resolution estimation
The spatial resolution is determined by analyzing in-
tensity profiles extracted along the multiple concentric
circles centered on the Siemens star.
A representative
concentric circle is shown in Fig. S6 (a), together with
the corresponding angular intensity profile in S6 (b). For
each adjacent spoke pair, concentric circles are drawn,
and the minimum radius at which the spokes could be
resolved as separate intensity peaks is identified. The cor-
responding spatial resolution is then calculated from this
radius. The reported spatial resolution (2.1±0.3 mm) is
the average of the values obtained for all adjacent spoke
pairs.
3.
Error prediction
The reconstruction error is quantified using the struc-
tural similarity index (SSIM) [42] between the recon-
11
FIG. S5. (a) Spatially varying response of the camera pixels measured under uniform illumination. (b–e) Four camera frames
acquired at 45 fps with no incident beam, showing fluctuating pixel response across the sensor area.
FIG. S6. (a) Reconstructed intensity image of the Siemens star generated using the Hadamard basis. The white circle shows
a representative concentric circle. (b) Intensity profile along the angular position of the white circle.
structed and measured intensity images at each itera-
tion, and is defined as (1 - SSIM). Fig.
S7 compares
the error behavior of reconstructions performed using
raster and Hadamard basis projections. The Hadamard
illumination-based reconstruction exhibits faster conver-
gence and achieves a lower error as compared to raster
scanning. In this case, each measurement simultaneously
records the diffraction information from multiple regions
of the object, resulting in faster convergence and a lower
reconstruction error.
4.
Refractive index calculation
The reconstructed phase map of the 3D-printed di-
electric object was unwrapped using a constrained phase
unwrapping, guided by prior knowledge of the sample
thickness (5 mm) and a constraint on the expected re-
fractive index range [43]. Since ptychographic phase re-
trieval yields relative phase rather than absolute values,
the known refractive index of the image background (air)
is used to provide a corrective global phase offset. The
effective refractive index, shown in Fig. S8 (b), is calcu-
lated from the unwrapped phase, Fig. S8 (a), using the
12
FIG. S7. The convergence of reconstruction error with number of iterations for raster and Hadamard bases.
following relation n = 1 + ϕλ
2πt [44], where t is the thick-
ness of the block and ϕ is the measured unwrapped phase.
From the index distribution map, we clearly see a differ-
ence in the refractive index of the block and inclusion
letter E, which ranges from an index of ∼1.2 for 20% in-
fill density to approximately the homogeneous index∼1.6
at 100% infill density [43].
Appendix D: Measurement parameters
Table S1 summarizes the acquisition parameters used
to collect the ptychographic datasets for each figure pro-
vided in the paper. Here the number of projections refers
to the total number of optical patterns used to recon-
struct a single image of the object. Similarly, the total
acquisition time represents the time required to collect all
frames needed for the reconstruction of one image. For
data acquisition, we capture a certain number of camera
frames for a given optical projection, this is defined by
the camera frames per projection (fpp) in the table. Note
that only the final camera frame acquired for each pro-
jection is used for reconstructions shown in Fig. 2 and 3.
In contrast, all acquired camera frames are used for the
video reconstruction shown in Fig. 4.
Appendix E: Video-rate imaging
Supplementary Visualization 1, referenced in the main
text shows a reference optical video of the dynamic ob-
ject, along with the corresponding amplitude and phase
reconstructions. At the default 30 fps playback speed this
corresponds to the real-time motion of the fluid droplets.
This dataset has been processed with a 3 × 3 × 3 median
filter, spanning both transverse spatial and temporal di-
mensions.
This improves the visual clarity of the still
images used for Fig. 4 of the main text, at the cost of a
reduction in effective spatial and temporal bandwidths.
For completeness, in Supplementary Visualization 2 we
show the unfiltered dataset, in which the motion of the
droplets may still be clearly observed. The optical cam-
era data is recorded off-axis (∼45◦) from the THz camera
due to geometrical constraints. To partially compensate
for this, the optical video data undergoes an affine trans-
formation consisting primarily of a horizontal scaling by a
factor of
√
2 together with a small horizontal shear. This
transformation approximately corrects for the difference
in viewing geometry between the optical and THz cam-
eras, although some residual discrepancies remain. Note
also that due to the viewing angle the left-hand side of
the plastic container in Fig. 4 (a) of the main text con-
tains refracted images of the colored droplets and has
therefore been rendered partially transparent to increase
visualization clarity.
[1] T. Latychevskaia, Journal of the Optical Society of Amer-
ica A 36, D31 (2019).
[2] F. Zhang, B. Chen, G. R. Morrison, J. Vila-Comamala,
M. Guizar-Sicairos, and I. K. Robinson, Nature commu-
nications 7, 13367 (2016).
[3] V. Boominathan, J. T. Robinson, L. Waller, and A. Veer-
araghavan, Optica 9, 1 (2021).
[4] P. Ferraro, S. Grilli, L. Miccio, D. Alfieri, S. De Nicola,
A. Finizio, and B. Javidi, Journal of Display Technology
4, 97 (2008).
[5] S. Utadiya, V. Trivedi, G. Sheoran, A. Srivastava,
D. Claus, H. Cabrera, and A. Anand, Optics and Lasers
in Engineering 160, 107227 (2023).
[6] R. Wang, Q. Zhao, L. Loetgering, F. Allars, Z. Hong,
T.
J.
Pennycook,
R.
Horstmeyer,
J.
Rodenburg,
13
FIG. S8.
(a) Phase image of the 3D-printed dielectric object after constrained phase unwrapping, (b) calculated effective
refractive index; the colormaps are from Ref. [37].
TABLE S1. Details of the acquisition parameters for each figure; fpp is camera frames per projection.
Figure No. of projections Camera fpp Camera frame rate (fps) Total acquisition time (s)
2a
64 (Raster)
12
45
17
2(b-d)
64 (Hadamard)
12
45
17
3a
64 (Random)
12
45
17
3b
32 (Random)
12
45
8.5
3c
8 (Random)
12
45
2.1
3d
4 (Random)
12
45
1
4
2 (Random)
2
67
0.06
A. Maiden, and G. Zheng, Nature Reviews Methods
Primers 5, 68 (2025).
[7] F. Monaco, M. Hubert, J. C. Da Silva, V. Favre-Nicolin,
D. Montinaro, P. Cloetens, and J. Laurencin, Materials
Characterization 187, 111834 (2022).
[8] A. M. Maiden, M. C. Sarahan, M. D. Stagg, S. M.
Schramm, and M. J. Humphry, Scientific reports 5, 14690
(2015).
[9] J. Rodenburg, A. Hurst, and A. Cullis, Ultramicroscopy
107, 227 (2007).
[10] J. Rodenburg and A. Maiden, Springer Handbook of Mi-
croscopy pp. 819–904 (2019).
[11] X. Huang, K. Lauer, J. N. Clark, W. Xu, E. Nazaret-
ski, R. Harder, I. K. Robinson, and Y. S. Chu, Scientific
reports 5, 9074 (2015).
[12] H. Lin, W. Xu, and F. Zhang, Optics Express 29, 43342
(2021).
[13] X. He, S. P. Veetil, X. Pan, A. Sun, C. Liu, and J. Zhu,
Optics Express 26, 25869 (2018).
[14] M. ˚Astrand, M. Kahnt, U. Johansson, and U. Vogt, Op-
tics express 32, 22771 (2024).
[15] M. Lyubomirskiy, F. Wittwer, M. Kahnt, F. Koch,
A. Kubec, K. V. Falch, J. Garrevoet, M. Seyrich,
C. David, and C. G. Schroer, Scientific Reports 12, 6203
(2022).
[16] P. Sidorenko and O. Cohen, Optica 3, 9 (2015).
[17] G. Zheng, C. Shen, S. Jiang, P. Song, and C. Yang, Na-
ture Reviews Physics 3, 207 (2021).
[18] P. C. Konda, L. Loetgering, K. C. Zhou, S. Xu, A. R.
Harvey, and R. Horstmeyer, Optics express 28, 9603
(2020).
[19] L. Tian, Z. Liu, L.-H. Yeh, M. Chen, J. Zhong, and
L. Waller, Optica 2, 904 (2015).
[20] R. Li, C. Li, H. Li, S. Wu, and G. Fang, IEEE Transac-
tions on Terahertz Science and Technology 9, 165 (2018).
[21] Z. D. Taylor, R. S. Singh, D. B. Bennett, P. Tewari, C. P.
Kealey, N. Bajwa, M. O. Culjat, A. Stojadinovic, H. Lee,
J.-P. Hubschman, et al., IEEE transactions on terahertz
science and technology 1, 201 (2011).
[22] L. Valzania, T. Feurer, P. Zolliker, and E. Hack, Optics
Letters 43, 543 (2018).
[23] P. Mukherjee,
V. Kumar,
F. Fauquet,
A. Badon,
D. Bigourd, K. Khare, S. Gigan, and P. Mounaix, Optica
13, 424 (2026).
[24] M. S. Heimbeck and H. O. Everitt, Advances in Optics
and Photonics 12, 1 (2020).
[25] H. Penketh, M. S. Ergoktas, C. R. Lawrence, D. B.
Phillips, J. E. Cunningham, E. Hendry, and M. Mrnka,
Optics Express 32, 5783 (2024).
[26] J. M. Rodenburg and H. M. Faulkner, Applied physics
letters 85, 4795 (2004).
[27] T.-C. Poon and J.-P. Liu, Introduction to modern dig-
ital holography: with MATLAB (Cambridge University
14
Press, 2014).
[28] A. M. Maiden and J. M. Rodenburg, Ultramicroscopy
109, 1256 (2009).
[29] P. Enfedaque, H. Chang, B. Enders, D. Shapiro, and
S. Marchesini, in International Conference on Compu-
tational Science (Springer, 2019), pp. 46–59.
[30] Z. Zhang, Ph.D. thesis, University of Sheffield (2021).
[31] W. Mei, Ph.D. thesis, University of Sheffield (2024).
[32] I. Hooper, N. Grant, L. Barr, S. Hornett, J. D. Murphy,
and E. Hendry, Scientific Reports 9, 18304 (2019).
[33] K. Sindhya, A. B. Ruiz, and K. Miettinen, in Interna-
tional Conference on Evolutionary Multi-Criterion Opti-
mization (Springer, 2011), pp. 212–225.
[34] A.
Maiden,
Ptychography
algorithms
from
Sheffield
University,
https://github.com/andyMaiden/
SheffieldPtycho
(2023),
GitHub
SheffieldPtycho,
accessed August 2025.
[35] N. E. Grant, S. L. Pain, E. Khorani, R. Jefferies,
A. Wratten, S. McNab, D. Walker, Y. Han, R. Beanland,
R. Bonilla, et al., Applied Surface Science 645, 158786
(2024).
[36] M. Mrnka, H. Penketh, D. B. Phillips, and E. Hendry,
Scientific Reports 14, 21056 (2024).
[37] Stephen23,
Matplotlib
”perceptually
uni-
form”
colormaps,
https://uk.mathworks.
com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/
62729-matplotlib-perceptually-uniform-colormaps
(2024),
MATLAB
Central
File
Exchange,
accessed
October 2025.
[38] R. Yang, P. Villanueva-Perez, and M. Kahnt, arXiv
preprint arXiv:2510.24542 (2025).
[39] Y. Yao, Y. Jiang, J. A. Klug, M. Wojcik, E. R. Maxey,
N. S. Sirica, C. Roehrig, Z. Cai, S. Vogt, B. Lai, et al.,
Scientific reports 10, 19550 (2020).
[40] M. Hirose, T. Higashino, N. Ishiguro, and Y. Takahashi,
Optics express 28, 1216 (2020).
[41] I. R. Hooper, E. Khorani, X. Romain, L. E. Barr,
T. Niewelt, S. Saxena, A. Wratten, N. E. Grant, J. D.
Murphy, and E. Hendry, Journal of Applied Physics 132
(2022).
[42] Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli,
IEEE transactions on image processing 13, 600 (2004).
[43] B. D. Price, S. N. Lowry, I. D. Hartley, and M. Reid,
Applied Optics 59, 5429 (2020).
[44] C. Joseph, C. Trujillo, and A. Doblas, Measurement p.
122139 (2026).
