 
1 
 
Assessing the Impact of Model Assumptions in Network Meta-
Regression: A Simulation Study 
 
Nana-adjoa Kwarteng1, Guido Schwarzer1, Adriani Nikolakopoulou1,2, Theodoros 
Evrenoglou1 
1Institute of Medical Biometry and Statistics, Faculty of Medicine and Medical Center, 
University of Freiburg, Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany 
2Department of Hygiene, Social-Preventive Medicine and Medical Statistics, School of 
Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece 
 
Corresponding Author:  
Nana-adjoa Kwarteng 
Institute of Medical Biometry and Statistics 
Faculty of Medicine and Medical Center - University of Freiburg 
Stefan-Meier-Str. 26, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany 
Email: Nana.Kwarteng@uniklinik-freiburg.de 
 
 
 
2 
 
Abstract 
Network meta-regression (NMR) extends network meta-analysis (NMA) by synthesizing evidence on 
multiple treatments while adjusting for potential effect modifiers. By accounting for effect modification, 
NMR can reduce between-study heterogeneity and improve the validity of relative treatment effects, 
providing insight regarding characteristics impacting treatment performance. However, choosing 
between available NMR models is complex, as each model addresses a similar, but unique research 
question, and the performance of available NMR models under varying network structures, between-
study heterogeneity, and interaction assumptions remains unclear. We evaluated the consequences of 
model misspecification in a simulation study of 120 evidence-network scenarios designed to reflect 
potential complications in evidence networks introduced by trial design, heterogeneity levels, and 
interaction assumptions. We compared the standard interaction-free NMA model with four NMR 
parameterizations differing in across-comparison interaction assumptions (common vs. independent 
interactions) and interaction consistency assumptions (with or without consistency). Standard NMA 
models generally overestimated treatment effects when effect modification was present. NMR models 
with independent across-comparison interactions maintained appropriate confidence interval coverage 
in dense networks generated with their corresponding consistency assumptions. However, their coverage 
deteriorated in sparse networks with between-study heterogeneity. Models assuming consistent 
interactions are advantageous in networks with multi-arm studies. Ignoring effect modification in NMA 
can lead to biased treatment effect estimates. When effect modification is anticipated, thoughtful 
alignment between network structure and NMR assumptions can reduce bias and misleading precision, 
supporting more reliable conclusions in medical decision making. These findings provide guidance for 
planning and interpreting network meta-analyses and meta-regressions in complex networks. 
 
 
 
3 
 
1. Introduction  
Network meta-analysis (NMA) simultaneously compares multiple treatments using evidence from 
several individual studies (Ades et al., 2024; Borenstein, 2009; Caldwell et al., 2010; Deeks et al., 2019; 
Dias et al., 2018; Higgins & Whitehead, 1996; Lu & Ades, 2004; Lumley, 2002; Nixon et al., 2007; 
Salanti, 2012; White et al., 2012). Synthesis of multiple studies involves the estimation of between‐
study heterogeneity, which can arise from variation in treatment effects across studies as well as 
differences in effect modifiers (Dias et al., 2018; Dias, Sutton, et al., 2013; Donegan et al., 2019; Higgins 
et al., 2019; Thompson & Sharp, 1999). If the distribution of an effect-modifier varies between studies 
or comparisons, standard NMA treatment effect estimates may be biased and lead to increased estimates 
of between-study heterogeneity (Cooper et al., 2009; Phillippo et al., 2020). Network meta-regression 
(NMR) addresses the potential between-study heterogeneity introduced by effect modifiers by modeling 
treatment-by-covariate interactions, enabling the assessment of effect modification across a treatment 
network (Cooper et al., 2009). In cases where the interaction substantially accounts for residual 
heterogeneity across studies, interpreting NMR parameters may provide clinically relevant insights 
(Donegan et al., 2015, 2017). Ideally, researchers examining patient-level effect modifiers such as age 
and gender should use individual participant data (IPD) for NMR (Riley et al., 2008). However, IPD are 
often unavailable due to obstacles in data acquisition, and, in such cases, NMR using aggregate data 
(AD) provides a practical alternative for investigating between-study heterogeneity (Chaimani, 2015; 
Polanin & Williams, 2016; Schmid et al., 2004; Van Der Worp et al., 2023).  
Implementation of NMR requires choices of modeling assumptions that can influence both the 
estimation and interpretation of treatment and interaction effects (Dias et al., 2018; Dias, Sutton, et al., 
2013; Donegan et al., 2019). These assumptions include whether consistency is imposed across 
interaction terms and how interactions are structured across treatment comparisons, which can be 
independent, common, or exchangeable (Dias et al., 2018; Donegan et al., 2019). The consistency 
assumption for interaction terms parallels the standard NMA consistency assumption for treatment 
effects. All effects are first expressed as basic pairwise comparisons relative to a single network 
reference treatment, and remaining comparisons are obtained indirectly as linear combinations of the 
basic comparisons. The across-comparison structural assumptions specify how interaction effects are 
modeled across treatment comparisons, with independent interactions yielding comparison-specific 
estimates, common interactions imposing a single pooled interaction across the network, and 
exchangeable interactions allowing comparison-specific interactions to vary around a shared mean 
through an additional heterogeneity parameter. Each combination of consistency and across-comparison 
assumptions corresponds to a distinct parameterization, leading to conceptual challenges in NMR 
because different combinations of assumptions define models of varying complexity that address related 
but non-identical hypotheses. Although prior work has described these assumptions conceptually (Dias 
et al., 2018; Dias, Sutton, et al., 2013; Donegan et al., 2019; Kwarteng et al., 2026), their comparative 
 
4 
 
performance under different scenarios in networks of aggregate data remains underexplored (Proctor et 
al., 2022).  
Beyond considerations of conceptual plausibility, NMR must address practical challenges related to data 
availability and network structure. Reliable estimation of treatment and interaction effects requires 
sufficiently connected networks, yet more than a quarter of published networks are sparse, containing 
limited direct evidence and few studies informing comparisons (Petropoulou et al., 2017). Conventional 
NMA models encounter difficulties in sparse data settings, which are intensified in NMR, particularly 
under the independent interaction assumption (Evrenoglou et al., 2024). Although NMR models with a 
common interaction term across comparisons may numerically mitigate interaction estimation 
difficulties associated with data sparsity, the consequences of this modeling choice remain unclear. 
Multi-arm studies are a common data structure in treatment networks (Nikolakopoulou et al., 2014; 
Petropoulou et al., 2017) and require methods capable of incorporating correlations between observed 
estimates within multi-arm studies (Rücker et al., 2017; Seide et al., 2020). However, NMR models 
without standard interaction consistency assumptions may incorporate different parameterizations due 
to the choice of study-specific reference treatment in the presence of multi-arm studies in NMA and 
NMR, potentially affecting parameter estimation and results interpretation (Dias, Welton, et al., 2013; 
Donegan et al., 2019; Spineli, 2022). Because interpretability and practicality of model selection depend 
on both clinical relevance and practical feasibility (Kwarteng et al., 2026), clear methodological 
guidance is needed to support appropriate model selection and robust application of NMR. 
This article aims to provide methodological guidance on NMR model selection and to clarify the trade-
offs associated with alternative NMR modeling assumptions. To this end, we conduct an extensive 
simulation study in which data are generated under varying conditions, including study design, network 
density, between-study heterogeneity, and true model specification. The combination of these data-
generating settings results in a total of 120 simulation scenarios. By comparing model performance, this 
work clarifies the consequences of modeling choices and supports applied researchers in selecting 
appropriate NMR specifications. The remainder of the article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we 
review the standard network meta-analysis (NMA) model and describe NMR models with independent 
and common interaction terms, under both imposed and relaxed consistency assumptions. In Section 3, 
we present the simulation design, and in Section 4 we summarize the main findings. Finally, in Section 
5, we discuss the implications of these results and provide practical guidance to support real-world 
clinical applications of NMR. 
2. Models 
2.1. Network Meta-Analysis (NMA) 
Consider a network comprising 𝑇 treatments in 𝑁 studies, with a common reference treatment across all 
𝑁 studies in the network and any two treatments in the network, denoted 𝑘 and 𝑞 , (𝑘, 𝑞= 1,2, … , 𝑇 and 
 
5 
 
𝑘≠𝑞). Let 𝑦𝑖,ℎ𝑘 denote the observed relative effect of treatment 𝑘(𝑖) compared with the study-specific 
reference treatment ℎ𝑖 in study 𝑖= 1,2, … , 𝑁 where 𝑘, ℎ(𝑖) ∈𝐾𝑖, and 𝐾𝑖 denotes the total number of arms 
in study 𝑖. For simplicity, the subscript 𝑖 is omitted from the treatment identifiers in subsequent notation. 
The random effects NMA model can then be parametrized as (Chaimani et al., 2019; Nikolakopoulou 
et al., 2020), 
 
𝒚~𝐍(𝛅, 𝐕) 
𝛅~𝐍(𝐗𝛍, 𝚺) 
(1) 
where 𝐲= [𝑦𝑖,ℎ𝑘]
′𝑖= 1,2, … , 𝑁 represents a vector of all study-specific treatment effects in the network 
(Kwarteng et al., 2026). The vector 𝝁 represents comparison specific treatment effects, and 𝜹 represents 
the study-specific treatment effect estimates. Two block-diagonal variance-covariance matrices, 𝐕 and 
𝚺, represent the within and across study variance-covariance matrices, respectively. For a study 𝑖 in the 
network, the diagonal elements of each matrix 𝐕𝐢 correspond to the known study-specific variances 𝜎𝑖,ℎ𝑘
2
, 
with off-diagonals in multi-arm studies corresponding to the respective study-specific covariances 
between treatments. By convention, we assume a single heterogeneity parameter 𝜏2  across all pairwise 
comparisons in the network, which are contained in the diagonal elements of the matrix 𝚺𝐢, while the 
off-diagonal elements for multi-arm studies are set to 
𝜏2
2  (Higgins & Whitehead, 1996; Lu & Ades, 
2009). Due to the assumption of treatment effect consistency, the comparison specific relative effect 
between any two treatments 𝑘 and 𝑞 can be obtained using the treatment effect consistency equation. 
 
𝜇𝑘𝑞= 𝜇ℎ𝑞−𝜇ℎ𝑘 
(2) 
 
The reference treatment is mathematically arbitrary, and allows the model to estimate 𝑇−1 basic 
parameters, whereas the remaining relative (𝑇
2) −(𝑇−1) treatment effects are calculated using the 
consistency equation (2). The design matrix 𝐗, incorporates the consistency equations and has dimension 
equal to ∑
(𝐾𝑖−1)
𝑁
𝑖=1
 × (𝑇−1) with rows corresponding to unique observed pairwise comparisons 
within each study and columns to the basic NMA parameters, 𝜇ℎ𝑘 (Kwarteng et al., 2026; Salanti et 
al., 2008). The NMR model fit can rely on either the Bayesian or frequentist framework (Dias et al., 
2018; Lu & Ades, 2004; Rücker, 2012). Within a frequentist setting, the basic parameters can be 
estimated using weighted least squares: 
 
𝛍̂ = (𝐗′(𝐕+ 𝚺̂)
−𝟏𝚾)
−1
 𝐗′(𝐕+ 𝚺̂)
−𝟏𝐲 
(3) 
 
The corresponding variance is defined as 
 
𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝝁̂) = (𝐗′(𝐕+ 𝚺̂)
−𝟏𝚾)
−1
 
(4) 
 
 
6 
 
and the estimated between studies variance-covariances matrix, 𝚺̂, can be obtained using restricted 
maximum likelihood (REML), the generalized Der-Simonian Laird estimator, or other techniques 
(DerSimonian & Laird, 1986; Veroniki et al., 2016; Viechtbauer, 2005). The standard NMA model, 
defined by both equations (1) and (2) is suitable when no study-level effect modification is present in 
the network. 
2.2. Network Meta-Regression 
In the presence of effect modifiers, the NMA model in equations (1) and (2) will not explain the between-
study heterogeneity (Cooper et al., 2009; Phillippo et al., 2020). NMR extends the NMA model to 
account for observed study-level effect modifiers and can be parameterized as, 
 
𝒚~𝐍(𝛅, 𝐕) 
𝛅~𝐍(𝐗∗𝛉, 𝚺) 
(5) 
𝒚, 𝚺, and 𝐕 are defined as in Section 2.1 and estimation is also possible using the weighted least squares 
approach. The new vector of unknown parameters 𝜽 consists of the adjusted treatment effect estimates, 
𝝁, and the treatment-by-covariate interactions, 𝜷, hereafter termed interactions. The vector of unknown 
parameters is then, 
 
𝛉= [𝛍, 𝛃]′ 
(6) 
Similar to matrix 𝐗, the augmented design matrix 𝐗∗ for the NMR has in total ∑
(𝐾𝑖−1)
𝑁
𝑖=1
 rows and 
columns equal to the length of the vector of unknown parameters 𝛉. As in NMA, treatment effect 
consistency is still imposed using equation (2), thus 𝝁 remains a vector of length 𝑇−1. The columns of 
the augmented design matrix 𝐗∗  and vectors of unknown parameters 𝛉 and 𝜷 depend on the underlying 
NMR assumptions. The NMR model fit can rely on either the frequentist or the Bayesian framework 
(Dias et al., 2018; Kwarteng et al., 2026). Within a frequentist framework, least-squares estimates can 
be obtained using weighted least squares analogous to equation (3), but incorporating the new design 
matrix, variance covariance matrix, and vector of unknown parameters 
 
𝛉̂ = (𝐗∗′(𝐕+ 𝚺∗̂)
−𝟏𝐗∗)
−1
 𝐗∗′(𝐕+ 𝚺∗̂)
−𝟏𝐲 
(7) 
 
with 𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝜽̂) = (𝐗′(𝐕+ 𝚺∗̂)
−𝟏𝚾)
−1
 and  𝚺∗̂, obtainable using techniques available in NMA such as 
REML, among other approaches (DerSimonian & Laird, 1986; Veroniki et al., 2016; Viechtbauer, 
2005). 
The corresponding Bayesian NMR implementation requires prior distributions for the unknown 
parameters 𝛉 and 𝜏. In the absence of strong evidence for priors, non-informative normal priors are 
commonly specified for 𝛉 (e.g. N(0,1002)), while weakly informative priors are typically used for the 
heterogeneity parameter τ (Röver et al., 2021). 
 
7 
 
Similar to treatment effect consistency, interaction consistency can enable the estimation of interaction 
terms through indirect evidence using the interaction consistency equation, 
 
𝛽𝑘𝑞= 𝛽ℎ𝑞−𝛽ℎ𝑘 
(8) 
For models with consistent interaction effects (CIE), the interaction consistency equation is embedded 
in the augmented design matrix 𝐗∗. However, in cases where the assumption of consistency for the 
interaction terms is weak, investigators might prefer not to impose the additional assumption of 
consistency for the interaction terms. Alternative NMR models that assume consistent NMA treatment 
effects but unrelated mean interaction effects (UMIE), estimate interaction parameters only from 
directly compared treatments. UMIE models do not contain a network-wide reference treatment for the 
interactions. Instead, reference treatments should be carefully defined on a study-specific basis to ensure 
that all studies comparing any two treatments 𝑘 and 𝑞 are synthesized in an interpretable direction. 
Directionality can be defined based on study-specific treatment attributes using an indicator variable 
𝑍𝑖,𝑘𝑞 describing whether treatment 𝑘 is ‘favored’ over treatment 𝑞 in a study (Chaimani & Salanti, 2012; 
Kwarteng et al., 2026).  
The directionality variable is incorporated in the construction of the design matrix 𝐗∗ of UMIE models, 
contributing to the estimation and, later, interpretation of interactions. Multi-arm studies pose similar 
challenges for UMIE models as they do for unrelated mean effect (UME) models and may result in 
different parameterizations based on the designated study-specific reference treatment determined from 
the directionality variable (Dias et al., 2010; Kwarteng et al., 2026).  
2.2.1. Network Meta-Regression with Common and Consistent Interaction Effects (NMR-CCIE) 
Common interaction terms assume the covariate has a similar impact across all treatment comparisons. 
In NMR models with consistency and common across-comparison interactions (NMR-CCIE), the single 
basic interaction parameter in equation (6) is estimated for all comparisons relative to a common 
reference treatment. Due to the interaction consistency equation (8) the non-reference containing 
interactions are thus zero, as 𝛽𝑘𝑞= 𝛽ℎ𝑞−𝛽ℎ𝑘= 𝛽𝐶𝐶𝐼𝐸−𝛽𝐶𝐶𝐼𝐸= 0. Unlike NMA, the selection of the 
reference treatment is no longer mathematically arbitrary, and implementations which lack sufficient 
data for the reference treatment may result in biased estimates or non-estimation. This structure is most 
appropriate when clinical reasoning supports a uniform covariate effect across all comparisons relative 
to a reference treatment. The NMR-CCIE model results in a design matrix of dimension 
∑
(𝐾𝑖−1)
𝑁
𝑖=1
 × (𝑇), which may lead to stable and converging interaction estimation in sparse 
networks, provided that the reference treatment has adequate data. However, in the presence of 
comparison specific effect modification, the NMR-CCIE model may mask comparison specific 
variation, resulting in biased estimates.  
 
8 
 
2.2.2. Network Meta-Regression with Independent and Consistent Interaction Effects (NMR-
ICIE) 
Independent interactions estimate a unique interaction for each pairwise comparison of treatments, such 
that the interaction term in equation (6) is uniquely estimated for each comparison, 𝑘 and 𝑞. NMR 
models assuming both independent across-comparison structures and consistency equations form NMR-
ICIE models. Similar to NMA, models that impose interaction consistency require the definition of a 
network-wide reference treatment. The NMR-ICIE model estimates 𝑇−1 basic interaction parameters 
relative to the selected reference treatment, and the remaining parameters are estimated using the 
interaction consistency equation (8). Consequently, NMR-ICIE yields a vector of unknown parameters 
with length equal to 2(𝑇−1) and a design matrix 𝐗∗ of dimension ∑
(𝐾𝑖−1)
𝑁
𝑖=1
 × 2(𝑇−1). Reliable 
estimation in the NMR-ICIE model requires adequate variation in the observed covariate for the 
compared treatments. When variation is limited, estimates may become less stable. In extreme cases, 
such as when an observed effect modifier for a treatment is observed in only a single study, variation is 
then absent and the associated treatment-specific interactions are not identifiable and cannot be 
estimated. 
2.2.3. Network Meta-Regression with Independent and Unrelated Mean Interaction Effects 
(NMR-IUMIE) 
UMIE models with independent across-comparison structures (NMR-IUMIE) estimate a unique 
interaction for each pairwise comparison of treatments, such that the interaction term in equation (6) is 
uniquely estimated for each comparison. Without the interaction consistency equation, the NMR-IUMIE 
model, attempts to estimate up to (𝑇
2) terms for 𝛃. Accordingly, in a fully connected and dense network, 
the design matrix has dimensions ∑
(𝐾𝑖−1)
𝑁
𝑖=1
 × ((𝑇−1) + (𝑇
2)  ). However, only comparisons with 
sufficient direct evidence are estimable, thus this model may suffer in the presence of sparse networks. 
Furthermore, the required incorporation of a directionality parameter in UMIE models leads to 
complications of parametrization which may lead to biased or non-estimation of interactions and 
treatment effects in the presence of multi-arm studies (Dias et al., 2010; Kwarteng et al., 2026). 
2.2.4. Network Meta-Regression with Common and Unrelated Mean Interaction Effects (NMR-
CUMIE) 
UMIE models with common across-comparison assumptions (NMR-CUMIE) assume a single 
interaction in equation (6), which applies to all comparisons and does not impose consistency. The 
design matrix has the same dimensions as the NMR-CCIE model. However, the two models differ in 
their consistency assumption. Without consistency, reference treatments are defined for each study and 
require a directionality parameter as shown. This structure is most appropriate when clinical reasoning 
supports a uniform covariate effect across all comparisons and a clinically meaningful or known 
directionality exists. As a UMIE model, the NMR-CUMIE model is also subject to multi-arm 
 
9 
 
parameterization complications and may perform poorly in the presence of multi-arm studies. As a 
model with common across-comparison structures, the NMR-CUMIE model may mask comparison 
specific variation in the presence of comparison specific effect modification, resulting in biased 
estimates. 
3. Simulation  
We design and evaluate our simulations using the recommendations outlined by Morris et al (Morris 
et al., 2019). 
3.1. Aims and Data Generation 
The simulations in this study are designed to explore the impact of data-generating mechanisms, varying 
study designs, heterogeneity, and network density on the estimation of adjusted treatment effects and 
interactions in NMA and NMR. To explore these aspects, we generated 1000 datasets with binary 
outcomes while varying the characteristics shown in Table 1, leading to 120 scenarios (Evrenoglou et 
al., 2022; Yao et al., 2025). Each simulated dataset contained equal numbers of participants across 
treatment arms within each study. The number of participants per arm was generated from a uniform 
distribution: 
 
𝑛𝑖𝑘~Unif(30,60) 
(9) 
Study design was specified as networks of exclusively two-arm studies or a mixture of two-arm and 
multi-arm studies, termed mixed-arm networks. For scenarios involving mixed-arm study designs, we 
generated fully connected networks in which approximately 10% of studies were multi-arm, reflecting 
empirical evidence reported by Petropoulou et al., with the remaining studies as two-arm studies, 
yielding fully-connected networks with an equal number of studies per comparison for 𝑇 treatments 
(Petropoulou et al., 2017). 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
Table 1: Overview of characteristics: Overview of characteristics examined in our simulation. Each 
combination of characteristics formed a unique scenario, and we generated 1000 datasets for each scenario.  
Characteristic Type 
Characteristic Value 
Density 
Fully connected (100%) 
Moderately dense (75%) 
Moderate sparse (50%) 
Sparse (35%)  
Between-study  
Heterogeneity 
None (𝜏 =0) 
Moderate (𝜏 =0.28) 
High (𝜏 =0.5) 
Study Designs 
Two-arm 
Mixed-arm (two-arm and multi-arm) 
Interaction  
Across-Comparison Assumption 
Common 
Independent 
None 
Interaction Consistency 
Imposed 
Not imposed 
 
Irrespective of study design, networks initially began as fully connected treatment networks comprising 
seven treatments, with four studies per pairwise comparison (Petropoulou et al., 2017). To vary the 
network density, we progressively removed direct comparisons from the initially fully-connected 
network, generating networks containing 100%, 75%, 50%, and 35% of possible direct comparisons. 
The predefined levels of network density resulted in eight distinct network structures (Figure 1). 
Between-study heterogeneity was pre-specified with values τ ϵ{0,0.29,0.50} in accordance with 
published empirical priors, and corresponding to no, moderate, and substantial between-study 
heterogeneity, respectively (Turner et al., 2015).  
 
11 
 
 
Figure 1: Network plots of the scenarios considered in the simulation. Nodes represent treatments and edges 
represent studies comparing those treatments, with the number of such studies overlaid. Edge colors represent the 
number of studies considered as direct evidence in the unrelated mean interaction effect models when using 
treatment order as the directionality parameter. Each network plot corresponds to three between-study 
heterogeneities and five data generating models 
We generated baseline risks of event, 𝑝𝑖,ℎ, in each study-level reference treatment group ℎ,  by assuming 
a binomially distributed 𝑝𝑖,ℎ~Binom(0.30,0.60), for the reference treatment. Note that here we generate 
this probability regardless of whether ℎ is observed in a specific study. Using the baseline risk, we 
computed the baseline odds of an event as,  
 
𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠𝑖,ℎ=
𝑝𝑖,ℎ
1 −𝑝𝑖,ℎ
  
(10) 
The target adjusted treatment effects corresponding to the treatment effects when the effect-modifying 
covariates are 0, were defined through log-odds ratios (log(𝑂𝑅)s) fixed at equal intervals between 0 and 
1 for treatments ℎ through 𝑇 compared to treatment ℎ. That is, for treatment 𝑘 in a 7-treatment network: 
 
log(𝑂𝑅ℎ𝑘) 𝜖{0, 0.17, 0.33, 0.50, … ,1} 
(11) 
Corresponding treatment-pair-specific coefficients log(𝑂𝑅)s then satisfy the NMA consistency 
equation (2), where 𝜇𝑘𝑞 represents the log(𝑂𝑅) for two treatments 𝑘 and 𝑞. 
Between-study heterogeneity was incorporated by generating study-specific treatment effects using a 
bivariate normal distribution: 
 
⌊
𝛿𝑖,ℎℎ
⋮
𝛿𝑖,ℎ𝑘
⌋~𝑁([
log(𝑂𝑅ℎℎ)
⋮
log(𝑂𝑅ℎ𝑘)
] , [
𝜏2
…
𝜏2/2
⋮
⋱
⋮
𝜏2/2
…
𝜏2
]) 
(12) 
 
12 
 
Each study included a continuous covariate 𝑋𝑖~𝑈𝑛𝑖𝑓(−1, 5), which could potentially modify the 
treatment effect. The covariate effect was incorporated through a treatment-pair-specific coefficient 𝛽𝑘𝑞. 
The structure of 𝛽𝑘𝑞 was scenario-specific and designed to fulfill the assumption criteria with respect to 
the data generating model, with non-zero values generated using a uniform distribution 𝛽𝑘𝑞 
~Unif(−0.75,0.75). The 𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠𝑖,ℎ of event for the non-reference treatments are then calculated as 
(Evrenoglou et al., 2022),  
 
𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠𝑖,𝑘= 𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠𝑖,𝑘∗𝑒(𝛿𝑖,ℎ𝑘+𝑋𝑖𝛽ℎ𝑘), 𝑘≠ℎ  
(13) 
Using the odds, we calculate event probabilities as,  
 
𝑝𝑖,𝑘=
𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠𝑖,𝑘
1 + 𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠𝑖,𝑘
 
(14) 
Finally, we generate the number of events for arm 𝑘 and study 𝑖, namely 𝑟𝑖,𝑘using a Binomial distribution 
as, 𝑟𝑖,𝑘~Binomial(𝑛𝑖,𝑘, 𝑝𝑖,𝑘). 
3.1.1. Network Meta-Regression (NMR) Specific Data Generation Considerations 
In scenarios assuming consistency, we defined 𝑇−1 treatment-pair-specific coefficients, 𝛽ℎ𝑘, for all 
reference containing comparisons where 𝑘≠ℎ. The interaction 𝛽ℎℎ was set to zero. For the CCIE data 
generating model, 𝛽ℎ𝑘 additionally fulfilled the constraint 𝛽ℎ𝑘= 𝛽ℎ𝑞. Using the NMR interaction 
consistency equation, 𝛽𝑘𝑞 was calculated for the remaining non-reference containing comparisons using 
the consistency equation in equation (8).  
For UMIE scenarios, we defined 
𝑇(𝑇−1)
2
 treatment-pair-specific coefficients 𝛽𝑘𝑞~Unif(−0.75,0.75) for 
each pairwise comparison where 𝑘≠𝑞, enabling unrelated interactions across comparisons, although 
interactions within multi-arm studies remain inherently consistent. Interactions for pairs were defined 
such that 𝑘 always preceded 𝑞 alpha-numerically within each pair. For the CUMIE data generating 
model, 𝛽𝑘𝑞 additionally fulfilled the constraint 𝛽ℎ𝑘= 𝛽𝑘𝑞, for all comparisons where 𝑞 
alphanumerically succeeded 𝑘. 
3.1.2. Network Meta-Analysis Specific Data Generation Considerations 
For data generated in accordance with the NMA model, 𝛽ℎ𝑘 was set to zero for all comparisons, reducing 
equation (14) to  
 
𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠𝑖,𝑘= 𝑜𝑑𝑑𝑠𝑖,ℎ∗𝑒(𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑂𝑅ℎ𝑘), 𝑘≠ℎ 
(15) 
 
3.2. Evaluated Methods 
For each of the 1000 datasets in each scenario, we implemented the five models, NMA, NMR-IUMIE, 
NMR-CUMIE, NMR-ICIE, and NMR-CCIE, in both frequentist and Bayesian contexts. Directionality 
 
13 
 
parameters in the UMIE models were defined using the alpha-numeric order of the treatments regardless 
of data generating mechanism. In line with the UMIE data-generating mechanisms, where consistency 
is expected when the effect-modifying covariate equals zero, model results were evaluated at a covariate 
value of zero. 
For the frequentist models, we used the netmetareg() function from the R package netmeta and 
estimated the between-study heterogeneity using restricted maximum likelihood (REML). 
netmetareg() does not require a centered covariate for proper estimation, although centering is often 
recommended to improve interpretation. For the simulation, covariates were not centered in frequentist 
implementations because the default scale yields treatment effects corresponding to the zero value of 
the effect-modifying covariate, as specified in the data-generating model. 
We fit the Bayesian models using JAGS for Markov Chain Monte-Carlo (MCMC) sampling via the R 
package JAGSUI (Kellner, 2021). The Bayesian models were fitted based on non-informative priors 
N(0,1002) for the main effects and interaction terms and weakly-informative half-normal priors with 
scale parameter equal to 1 for the between-study heterogeneity parameter. The models were run with 
two parallel chains, each containing 10000 burn-in period and 30000 iterations. To ensure proper chain 
mixing, covariates were centered before implementation in the Bayesian settings (Dias, Sutton, et al., 
2013). Bayesian estimates were transformed to correspond to an effect modifier value of zero, thereby 
ensuring comparability with the frequentist models and the data-generating mechanisms, for which 
consistency was defined at zero.  However, this implementation requirement may introduce bias in the 
UMIE models. The syntax with detailed information on the Bayesian model implementations is 
available in section 3 of the supplementary material.   
3.3. Estimands and Performance Measures 
The estimands of interest are the treatment effects, interaction effects, and between-study heterogeneity 
(𝜏) on the log(𝑂𝑅) scale.  Performance measures were also evaluated on the log(𝑂𝑅) scale. Estimates 
and measures of uncertainty from each model were used to quantify absolute bias, mean squared error 
(MSE), and coverage.  
We calculated the absolute bias for treatment effects, interaction effects, and between-study 
heterogeneity, by taking the difference between the point estimates and the true value defined in data 
generation (El Badisy, 2024; Morris et al., 2019). Bias and variance of estimates were used to compute 
the mean squared error  (Morris et al., 2019). Coverage probabilities for treatment and interaction effects 
were calculated using 95% confidence and credible intervals for the frequentist and Bayesian models, 
respectively. Coverage probabilities for the interactions reflect the observed proportion of confidence 
intervals that contained the true interaction for each comparison in each dataset. Performance measures 
were averaged across treatment comparisons. Coverage probabilities were assessed accounting for 
Monte Carlo sampling variability, with nominal coverage defined as falling within the 95% confidence 
 
14 
 
interval of 0.95 ± 1.96√0.95(1−0.95)
1000
= (0.94,0.96) for the target coverage of 0.95 in 1000 replications 
(Burton et al., 2006). Coverage probabilities below this range indicate under-coverage, whereas 
coverage above this range indicates excessive coverage. 
4. Results 
We present the results of frequentist implementations in two-arm and mixed-arm networks. Detailed 
findings for Bayesian implementations are provided in Sections S1 and S2 of the supplementary 
material. The results of the Bayesian and frequentist models are broadly similar, with some exceptions 
which are discussed in Section S1 of the supplementary materials. More granular results regarding 
simulation 
performance 
measures 
are 
available 
online 
at 
https://kwartengna.shinyapps.io/NMR_Simulation_Results/.  
4.1. Bias 
4.1.1. Bias of NMA Model 
Estimates of the mean bias in treatment effects for the NMA model are presented in Figure 2. The 
associated heterogeneity bias is displayed in Error! Reference source not found.. When data were g
enerated under the NMA data generating mechanism, treatment effect bias was negligible for the NMA 
model across all network structures, with the largest magnitude of 0.01 observed in high heterogeneity, 
sparsely connected networks. The NMA model exhibited its largest bias of treatment effects when data 
were generated under the CUMIE mechanism. Across all data-generating scenarios with effect 
modification, the NMA overestimated treatment effects and between-study heterogeneity, reflecting its 
inability to accommodate effect modification 
4.1.2. Bias of NMR-CCIE Model 
Figure 2 presents the mean bias in treatment effects and interactions for NMR models, while 
heterogeneity bias is illustrated in Error! Reference source not found.. The NMR-CCIE model e
xhibited the highest magnitudes of bias in CUMIE data generating scenarios, reaching magnitudes of 
0.32 and 0.20 for treatment effects and interactions, respectively. In UMIE data generating scenarios, 
the NMR-CCIE model persistently overestimated treatment effects and underestimated interactions. 
Bias was low when the implemented NMR-CCIE model matched the data generating mechanism, with 
values of bias below 0.01 for treatment effects and interactions. Treatment effect bias was comparably 
small when the model was applied to networks generated with the NMA mechanism reaching values of 
0.02. In ICIE, IUMIE, and CUMIE data generating scenarios, the NMR-CCIE model overestimated the 
between study heterogeneity, whereas there was no persistent direction of heterogeneity bias when the 
NMR-CCIE model was applied to data generated according to the NMA and CCIE data. 
.
 
15 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Bias Estimates: Bias of relative effect, interaction, and heterogeneity estimates averaged across comparisons for each scenario.
 
16 
 
4.1.3. Bias of NMR-ICIE Model 
When networks of studies were generated with ICIE interactions, NMR-ICIE generally produced low 
bias for both treatment effects and interactions, with magnitudes not exceeding 0.01 and 0.01, 
respectively. Treatment effect bias was comparably small when the model was applied to networks 
generated with the NMA and CCIE mechanisms with values reaching 0.02 and 0.02 respectively. Bias 
of interactions was comparably low when the NMR-ICIE model was applied to CCIE generated data 
reaching values up to 0.01. The NMR-ICIE model showed the greatest bias in treatment effect estimation 
when data were generated under the IUMIE mechanism, with treatment effect bias values reaching up 
to 0.04. The highest magnitude of bias for interactions was observed when the NMR-ICIE model was 
applied to CUMIE generated data with values reaching 0.09. The NMR-ICIE model overestimated 
heterogeneity in networks generated with UMIE assumptions, whereas there was no persistent direction 
of heterogeneity bias in networks generated with consistent interactions, or networks generated in 
accordance with the NMA model. 
4.1.4. Bias of NMR-IUMIE Model 
For networks generated in accordance with the IUMIE model, the bias of the implemented NMR-IUMIE 
model reached 0.08 and 0.03 for treatment effects and interactions respectively. In fully connected 
networks, the NMR-IUMIE model showed relatively low bias for all other data generating models with 
bias reaching 0.01 and 0.01 for treatment effects and interactions respectively. However, sparser 
networks showed increased bias, particularly in CUMIE data generating scenarios where bias reached 
0.29 for treatment effects and 0.10 for interactions. In networks of mixed-arm studies generated in 
accordance with the IUMIE and CUMIE models, the NMR-IUMIE model overestimated heterogeneity. 
However, in networks of two-arm studies, the NMR-IUMIE model showed no persistent direction of 
heterogeneity estimation. 
4.1.5. Bias of NMR-CUMIE Model 
The NMR-CUMIE model exhibited the highest bias for treatment effect estimation in networks of 
mixed-arm studies generated under the IUMIE mechanism, reaching values of up to 0.09. Bias of 
treatment effects was below 0.01 when the NMR-CUMIE model was applied to NMA-generated data, 
and was slightly higher in CUMIE-generated networks, reaching values of 0.05. In networks containing 
multi-arm studies, the NMR-CUMIE model showed persistent overestimation of heterogeneity in all 
data generating models, except the NMA scenario. However, in networks of two-arm studies, the NMR-
CUMIE model only overestimated heterogeneity for data generated under the IUMIE, CCIE, and ICIE 
mechanisms. 
 
17 
 
4.2. MSE 
4.2.1. MSE of NMA Model 
Patterns of mean squared error across mixed-arm networks are shown in Figure 3. Across all data 
generating mechanisms, treatment effect MSE from the NMA model increased with increasing between 
study heterogeneity and decreasing network density. These patterns occurred in both two-arm and 
mixed-arm networks, indicating strong sensitivity of NMA precision to heterogeneity and sparsity. 
4.2.2. MSE of NMR-CCIE Model 
For the NMR-CCIE model, treatment effect and interaction MSE increased with increasing 
heterogeneity across all data-generating mechanisms. Treatment effect MSE also increased with 
decreasing network density in all data generating mechanisms. However, the relationship between 
interaction MSE and density was less persistent across data generating scenarios. In networks of mixed-
arm studies, interaction MSE increased with decreasing density for all data-generating mechanisms. 
However, in networks of two-arm studies generated under the IUMIE mechanism, this trend in 
interaction MSE in the NMR-CCIE model did not persist. 
4.2.3. MSE of NMR-ICIE Model 
In mixed-arm networks generated under CCIE, NMA, or IUMIE mechanisms, no clear relationship 
between MSE and heterogeneity was observed when using the NMR-ICIE model. In contrast, when data 
were generated under ICIE or CUMIE mechanisms, both treatment effect and interaction MSE increased 
with increasing heterogeneity in mixed-arm networks. In networks of two-arm studies, treatment effect 
and interaction MSE increased with heterogeneity across all data-generating mechanisms. In all data 
generating mechanisms, the treatment effect and interaction MSE from the NMR-ICIE model increased 
with decreasing density. 
4.2.4. MSE of NMR-IUMIE Model 
Under IUMIE data generation, interaction MSE from the NMR-IUMIE model showed no persistent 
relationship with heterogeneity. However, when data were generated under ICIE, CCIE, CUMIE, or 
NMA mechanisms in both two-arm and mixed-arm networks, treatment effect and interaction MSE 
increased with heterogeneity. For the NMR-IUMIE model, interaction MSE increased with decreasing 
network density across all data-generating mechanisms. In mixed-arm networks, treatment effect MSE 
from NMR-IUMIE models also increased as density decreased, whereas no consistent density-related 
trend was observed in two-arm networks.  
. 
 
18 
 
 
Figure 3: MSE: Mean squared error (MSE) of relative effect and interaction estimates averaged across comparisons for each scenario.
 
19 
 
4.2.5. MSE of NMR-CUMIE Models 
Similar to the NMA model, the treatment effect and interaction MSE from the NMR-CUMIE model increased with increasing 
between study heterogeneity and decreasing network density in all data generating mechanisms. These patterns were consistent 
across both two-arm and mixed-arm networks, indicating similarly strong sensitivity of NMR-CUMIE precision to 
heterogeneity and sparsity 
4.3. Coverage 
4.3.1. Coverage of NMA Model 
Coverage patterns varied across models and data-generating mechanisms (Figure 4). The NMA model 
generally achieved or exceeded nominal coverage for treatment effects when networks were generated 
without effect modification. Under its own data-generating mechanism, the NMA model only exhibited 
slight under-coverage of 0.94 in sparse networks of two-arm studies with high heterogeneity. Once effect 
modification was introduced using CCIE, ICIE, and CUMIE assumptions, the model showed under-
coverage of treatment effects across scenarios, and coverage values remained below 0.86. In IUMIE-
generated networks lacking full connectivity, the NMA model exhibited nominal or excessive coverage 
for treatment effects. However, because NMA models are inherently unable to capture effect 
modification, the coverage of NMA in IUMIE generated data remains inadequate. 
4.3.2. Coverage of NMR-CCIE Model 
When data were generated under NMA or CCIE mechanisms, the NMR-CCIE models generally 
maintained nominal treatment-effect coverage, with exceptions in sparse two-arm networks with high 
heterogeneity (Figure 4). Under the same data generating mechanisms, the NMR-CCIE model showed 
persistent excess coverage of interactions, indicating conservative confidence intervals. In contrast, 
under ICIE and CUMIE data generating scenarios, the NMR-CCIE model exhibited persistent under-
coverage for both the treatment effects and interactions, and coverage values remained below 0.88. In 
IUMIE data generating scenarios, the NMR-CCIE model exhibited persistent under-coverage of 
interactions below 0.21, undermining the range of treatment effect coverage values achieved in the 
IUMIE data generating scenarios encompassing under-coverage with values of 0.93 and over-coverage 
with values of 0.97. 
 
20 
 
 
Figure 4: Coverage Probabilities: Coverage probability of 95% confidence intervals for the relative effect and interaction parameters averaged across comparisons for each scenario
 
21 
 
4.3.3. Coverage of NMR-ICIE Model 
In networks generated in accordance with the ICIE, CCIE, and NMA mechanisms, the NMR-ICIE 
models resulted in nominal coverage levels for treatment effects and interactions in networks with low 
to moderate heterogeneity, but occasionally displayed under-coverage in networks with high between-
study heterogeneity (Figure 4). The under-coverage of the NMR-ICIE models in networks with high 
between study heterogeneity, was more frequently observed in networks containing multi-arm studies, 
where the median coverage probability was 0.94. In CUMIE and IUMIE data generation scenarios, the 
NMR-ICIE exhibited nominal or excessive levels of coverage for treatment effects ranging from 0.94 
to 1.00, but interactions persistently exhibited under-coverage below 0.91 across scenarios.  
4.3.4. Coverage of NMR-IUMIE Model 
In networks of two-arm studies generated under the NMA or CCIE assumptions, the NMR-IUMIE 
model achieved nominal coverage levels for both treatment effects and interactions in all scenarios 
except the high-heterogeneity, low-density scenario (Figure 4). Coverage deteriorated in mixed-arm 
networks, with treatment effect coverage ranging from 0.91 to 0.96. Treatment effect under-coverage 
was observed in networks with mixed-arm studies and high heterogeneity, where the median coverage 
was 0.93 and networks with low density where the median coverage was 0.93. Under the ICIE data 
generating mechanism, the NMR-IUMIE model maintained nominal coverage in most networks of two-
arm studies, but exhibited under-coverage in low-density settings irrespective of heterogeneity and in 
moderately sparse settings with moderate to high heterogeneity. In mixed-arm ICIE networks, nominal 
coverage of treatment effects and interactions was observed in fully connected networks, with under-
coverage emerging in sparser networks. In networks of two-arm studies, the NMR-IUMIE model 
exhibited nominal to excess levels of coverage in most IUMIE data generating scenarios, with 
exceptions in moderately sparse networks with high and moderate between study-heterogeneity. The 
model also achieved nominal coverage in most CUMIE-generated scenarios of two-arm networks, with 
exceptions in sparse networks regardless of heterogeneity, as well as in moderately sparse networks with 
heterogeneity. In IUMIE and CUMIE data generation mechanisms, NMR-IUMIE interaction under-
coverage occurred frequently in mixed-arm networks, with coverage probabilities ranging from 0.89 to 
0.93, highlighting sensitivity to multi-arm study designs. 
4.3.5. Coverage of NMR-CUMIE Model 
The NMR-CUMIE model retained nominal treatment effect coverage in networks with the NMA data 
generating mechanism irrespective of study design, with excess interaction coverage in sparse two-arm 
networks without heterogeneity (Figure 4). In the ICIE and CCIE data generation scenarios, the NMR-
CUMIE model persistently showed under-coverage for both treatment effects and interactions, with 
values below 0.90. In IUMIE data generating scenarios, the NMR-CUMIE model exhibited persistent 
under-coverage of interactions below 0.43, undermining, the range of treatment effect coverage 
probabilities achieved in several of the corresponding IUMIE data-generating scenarios from 0.96 to 
 
22 
 
0.99. In its own data-generating setting, the NMR-CUMIE model achieved nominal or excessive 
coverage in two-arm networks, except under sparse, high-heterogeneity conditions, where the coverage 
probability was 0.94. In networks of mixed-arm studies, the NMR-CUMIE model exhibited under-
coverage of interactions in the majority of scenarios generated with its corresponding data generating 
mechanism, indicating susceptibility to multi-arm studies. 
5. Discussion 
5.1. Overall Findings and Implications for Practice 
In this manuscript we examined the performance of multiple NMR models across several data-
generating mechanisms to evaluate the impact of consistency, interaction structure, network density, 
and between-study heterogeneity on model performance. Our results may provide general guidance for 
selecting NMR models under the data-generating conditions examined in Figure 5, indicating the 
practical feasibility of each model in the different settings. Although the NMA model demonstrated 
adequate coverage in networks without interactions, it exhibited persistent biased treatment effect 
estimates in the presence of study-level effect modifiers leading to sub-nominal coverage, reflecting the 
limitations of neglecting effect modification across heterogeneous studies.  
 
Figure 5: Overview of characteristic specific model recommendations. Primarily based on the coverage 
probabilities, this figure indicates when each model could capture the true treatment effects and treatment-covariate 
interactions in the presence of a particular data generating characteristic. 
The NMR-ICIE model generally exhibited small bias in networks with consistent interactions resulting 
in nominal coverage, regardless of whether the data generating across-comparison interaction were 
independent or common across comparisons. However, the model remained vulnerable to sparse 
networks with between-study heterogeneity, highlighting a practical challenge related to data 
 
23 
 
availability. The common across-comparison assumption of the NMR-CCIE model may provide a 
practical solution for NMR implementation in sparse networks, as the NMR-CCIE models achieved 
nominal or excessive treatment effect coverage levels when data were generated under their 
corresponding mechanisms, and were generally robust to between-study heterogeneity and sparsity. 
Corresponding, confidence intervals for their interactions in NMR-CCIE models were persistently 
conservative and exhibited excessive coverage. Additionally, though robust to sparse networks, NMR-
CCIE models require careful selection of reference treatments for interpretation and warrant future 
treatment network updates to explore patterns of effect modification at the comparison-specific level. 
The coverage of the NMR-IUMIE model captured the true estimates across all effect modifying 
structures in densely connected networks of two-arm studies, yet coverage declined in mixed-arm or 
sparse networks, highlighting practical limits of the model’s generalizability. The NMR-CUMIE model 
exhibited persistent sub-nominal coverage in mixed-arm networks, again illustrating the limits of UMIE 
models in the presence of multi-arm studies. In the presence of multi-arm studies, models with the 
consistency assumption may be preferable, because they can incorporate all comparisons of a multi-arm 
study. 
In the absence of multi-arm studies and between-study heterogeneity, all NMR models, including the 
NMR-CCIE and NMR-CUMIE models, are capable of approximating the NMA model in scenarios 
without effect modification. This property occurs because all NMR models effectively reduce to the 
NMA model when interaction parameters approach zero and are correctly estimated.  Furthermore, 
though the CCIE, ICIE, and IUMIE models can be parameterized to estimate similar comparisons, in 
the presence of effect modification, the CUMIE model is distinct from the CCIE and ICIE models and 
does not approximate the same relationships due to the different underlying comparisons which are then 
aggregated in their modeling structures.  
5.2. Strengths and Limitations 
This work provides a detailed exploration of the impact of network density on NMR performance in the 
presence of known data-generating mechanisms. To our knowledge, this is the most extensive 
simulation study evaluating several network meta-regression models in a wide range of data-generating 
settings. Our findings are consistent with existing simulation studies that examined the ability of models 
to capture treatment effect estimation (Harari et al., 2023; Kiefer et al., 2020; Proctor et al., 2022; Seide 
et al., 2020). However, we extend these simulation studies by  exploring the interaction estimation 
capabilities of several NMR modelling assumptions (Proctor et al., 2022).  
In applied settings, the true underlying data generation mechanism is unknown. Furthermore, tools for 
assessing the plausibility of consistency assumptions are limited. In densely-connected networks of two-
arm studies, the NMR-IUMIE model can provide insight by estimating independent interactions for each 
comparison, but this approach is insufficient in multi-arm and sparse networks. Thus, UMIE models 
 
24 
 
could benefit from further adaptations to appropriately incorporate multi-arm studies, as has been 
performed for the UME equivalent (Spineli, 2022). Future research is also needed for developing model-
selection frameworks and diagnostic tools that help analysts identify appropriate consistency and effect-
modification assumptions, particularly in clinical settings where the true generating mechanism is 
uncertain.  
5.3. Conclusion 
Our findings highlight the importance of aligning model assumptions with both the anticipated form of 
effect modification and the structure of the evidence network. In the presence of effect modification, the 
use of NMA models, which do not account for treatment-covariate interactions, can lead to biased 
estimates of both treatment effects and between-study heterogeneity. In such settings, NMR models 
should be considered, and the choice of model should be guided by a combination of statistical rationale 
and clinical expertise.  
In practice, NMR models that assume consistent interactions provide practical benefits, particularly in 
networks that include multi-arm studies. In densely connected networks, the NMR-IUMIE model can 
serve as a tool for assessing the assumptions of other NMR models in well-connected networks of two-
arm studies, but its applicability in multi-arm and sparse structures remains challenging, thus it is 
insufficient for exploring assumptions in many contexts. Sparse networks present additional challenges 
for NMR irrespective of consistency assumptions and often motivate the use of models assuming a 
common interaction term. When adopting models with consistent interactions, the plausibility of the 
consistency assumption should be assessed, while models assuming a common interaction require 
scrutiny of the across-comparison assumption (Donegan et al., 2019). 
 
 
 
25 
 
References 
 Ades, A. E., Welton, N. J., Dias, S., Phillippo, D. M., & Caldwell, D. M. (2024). Twenty years of 
network meta‐analysis: Continuing controversies and recent developments. Research Synthesis 
Methods, jrsm.1700. https://doi.org/10.1002/jrsm.1700 
Borenstein, M. (2009). Introduction to meta-analysis. Wiley. 
Burton, A., Altman, D. G., Royston, P., & Holder, R. L. (2006). The design of simulation studies in 
medical statistics. Statistics in Medicine, 25(24), 4279–4292. https://doi.org/10.1002/sim.2673 
Caldwell, D. M., Welton, N. J., & Ades, A. E. (2010). Mixed treatment comparison analysis provides 
internally coherent treatment effect estimates based on overviews of reviews and can reveal 
inconsistency. 
Journal 
of 
Clinical 
Epidemiology, 
63(8), 
875–882. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2009.08.025 
Chaimani, A. (2015). Accounting for baseline differences in meta-analysis. Evidence Based Mental 
Health, 18(1), 23–26. https://doi.org/10.1136/eb-2014-102035 
Chaimani, A., Caldwell, D. M., Li, T., Higgins, J. P., & Salanti, G. (2019). 11. Undertaking network 
meta‐analyses. In J. P. T. Higgins, J. Thomas, J. Chandler, M. Cumpston, T. Li, M. J. Page, & 
V. A. Welch (Eds.), Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions (1st ed., pp. 
285–320). Wiley. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119536604.ch11 
Chaimani, A., & Salanti, G. (2012). Using network meta-analysis to evaluate the existence of small-
study effects in a network of interventions. Research Synthesis Methods, 3(2), 161–176. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/jrsm.57 
Cooper, N. J., Sutton, A. J., Morris, D., Ades, A. E., & Welton, N. J. (2009). Addressing between-study 
heterogeneity and inconsistency in mixed treatment comparisons: Application to stroke 
prevention treatments in individuals with non-rheumatic atrial fibrillation. Statistics in 
Medicine, 28(14), 1861–1881. https://doi.org/10.1002/sim.3594 
Deeks, J. J., Higgins, J. P., Altman, D. G., & on behalf of the Cochrane Statistical Methods Group. 
(2019). Analysing data and undertaking meta‐analyses. In J. P. T. Higgins, J. Thomas, J. 
Chandler, M. Cumpston, T. Li, M. J. Page, & V. A. Welch (Eds.), Cochrane Handbook for 
 
26 
 
Systematic 
Reviews 
of 
Interventions 
(1st 
ed., 
pp. 
241–284). 
Wiley. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119536604.ch10 
DerSimonian, R., & Laird, N. (1986). Meta-analysis in clinical trials. Controlled Clinical Trials, 7(3), 
177–188. https://doi.org/10.1016/0197-2456(86)90046-2 
Dias, S., Ades, A. E., Welton, N. J., Jansen, J. P., & Sutton, A. J. (2018). Network meta-analysis for 
Decision Making (1st ed.). John Wiley & Sons, Inc. https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/-
/9781118647509/?ar 
Dias, S., Sutton, A. J., Welton, N. J., & Ades, A. E. (2013). Evidence synthesis for decision making 3: 
Heterogeneity—Subgroups, meta-regression, bias, and bias-adjustment. Medical Decision 
Making : An International Journal of the Society for Medical Decision Making, 33(5), 618–640. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0272989X13485157 
Dias, S., Welton, N. J., Marinho, V. C. C., Salanti, G., Higgins, J. P. T., & Ades, A. E. (2010). Estimation 
and Adjustment of Bias in Randomized Evidence by Using Mixed Treatment Comparison Meta-
Analysis. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series A: Statistics in Society, 173(3), 613–
629. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-985X.2010.00639.x 
Dias, S., Welton, N. J., Sutton, A. J., Caldwell, D. M., Lu, G., & Ades, A. E. (2013). Evidence Synthesis 
for Decision Making 4: Inconsistency in Networks of Evidence Based on Randomized 
Controlled 
Trials. 
Medical 
Decision 
Making, 
33(5), 
641–656. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0272989X12455847 
Donegan, S., Dias, S., & Welton, N. J. (2019). Assessing the consistency assumptions underlying 
network meta‐regression using aggregate data. Research Synthesis Methods, 10(2), 207–224. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/jrsm.1327 
Donegan, S., Welton, N. J., Tudur Smith, C., D’Alessandro, U., & Dias, S. (2017). Network meta-
analysis including treatment by covariate interactions: Consistency can vary across covariate 
values. Research Synthesis Methods, 8(4), 485–495. https://doi.org/10.1002/jrsm.1257 
Donegan, S., Williams, L., Dias, S., Tudur-Smith, C., & Welton, N. (2015). Exploring Treatment by 
Covariate Interactions Using Subgroup Analysis and Meta-Regression in Cochrane Reviews: A 
 
27 
 
Review 
of 
Recent 
Practice. 
PLOS 
ONE, 
10(6), 
e0128804. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0128804 
El Badisy, I. (2024). mcstatsim: Monte Carlo Statistical Simulation Tools Using a Functional Approach 
[Computer software]. https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=mcstatsim 
Evrenoglou, T., Metelli, S., Thomas, J., Siafis, S., Turner, R. M., Leucht, S., & Chaimani, A. (2024). 
Sharing information across patient subgroups to draw conclusions from sparse treatment 
networks. Biometrical Journal, 66(3), 2200316. https://doi.org/10.1002/bimj.202200316 
Evrenoglou, T., White, I. R., Afach, S., Mavridis, D., & Chaimani, A. (2022). Network meta‐analysis 
of rare events using penalized likelihood regression. Statistics in Medicine, 41(26), 5203–5219. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/sim.9562 
Harari, O., Soltanifar, M., Cappelleri, J. C., Verhoek, A., Ouwens, M., Daly, C., & Heeg, B. (2023). 
Network meta‐interpolation: Effect modification adjustment in network meta‐analysis using 
subgroup 
analyses. 
Research 
Synthesis 
Methods, 
14(2), 
211–233. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/jrsm.1608 
Higgins, J. P. T., Thomas, J., Chandler, J., Cumpston, M., Li, T., Page, M. J., & Welch, V. A. (Eds.). 
(2019). 10.11 Investigating heterogeneity. In Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of 
Interventions (1st ed.). Wiley. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119536604 
Higgins, J. P. T., & Whitehead, A. (1996). Borrowing strength from external trials in a meta-analysis. 
Statistics 
in 
Medicine, 
15(24), 
2733–2749. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-
0258(19961230)15:24%3C2733::AID-SIM562%3E3.0.CO;2-0 
Kellner, K. (2021). jagsUI: A Wrapper Around “rjags” to Streamline “JAGS” Analyses. 
https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=jagsUI 
Kiefer, C., Sturtz, S., & Bender, R. (2020). A simulation study to compare different estimation 
approaches for network meta-analysis and corresponding methods to evaluate the consistency 
assumption. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 20(1), 36. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12874-
020-0917-3 
 
28 
 
Kwarteng, N., Evrenoglou, T., Mueller, J., Elsaesser, M., Schramm, E., Schwarzer, G., & 
Nikolakopoulou, A. (2026). Illustrating the Assumptions of Meta-Regression in Treatment 
Networks. In Review. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-8235913/v1 
Lu, G., & Ades, A. (2009). Modeling between-trial variance structure in mixed treatment comparisons. 
Biostatistics (Oxford, England), 10(4), 792–805. https://doi.org/10.1093/biostatistics/kxp032 
Lu, G., & Ades, A. E. (2004). Combination of direct and indirect evidence in mixed treatment 
comparisons. Statistics in Medicine, 23(20), 3105–3124. https://doi.org/10.1002/sim.1875 
Lumley, T. (2002). Network meta-analysis for indirect treatment comparisons. Statistics in Medicine, 
21(16), 2313–2324. https://doi.org/10.1002/sim.1201 
Morris, T. P., White, I. R., & Crowther, M. J. (2019). Using simulation studies to evaluate statistical 
methods. Statistics in Medicine, 38(11), 2074–2102. https://doi.org/doi.org/10.1002/sim.8086 
Nikolakopoulou, A., Chaimani, A., Veroniki, A. A., Vasiliadis, H. S., Schmid, C. H., & Salanti, G. 
(2014). Characteristics of Networks of Interventions: A Description of a Database of 186 
Published Networks. PLoS ONE, 9(1), e86754. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0086754 
Nikolakopoulou, A., White, I. R., & Salanti, G. (2020). Network Meta-Analysis. In C. H. Schmid, T. 
Stijnen, & I. R. White, Handbook of Meta-Analysis (1st ed., pp. 187–218). Chapman and 
Hall/CRC. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781315119403-10 
Nixon, R. M., Bansback, N., & Brennan, A. (2007). Using mixed treatment comparisons and meta-
regression to perform indirect comparisons to estimate the efficacy of biologic treatments in 
rheumatoid arthritis. Statistics in Medicine, 26(6), 1237–1254. https://doi.org/10.1002/sim.2624 
Petropoulou, M., Nikolakopoulou, A., Veroniki, A.-A., Rios, P., Vafaei, A., Zarin, W., Giannatsi, M., 
Sullivan, S., Tricco, A. C., Chaimani, A., Egger, M., & Salanti, G. (2017). Bibliographic study 
showed improving statistical methodology of network meta-analyses published between 1999 
and 
2015. 
Journal 
of 
Clinical 
Epidemiology, 
82, 
20–28. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2016.11.002 
Phillippo, D. M., Dias, S., Ades, A. E., Belger, M., Brnabic, A., Schacht, A., Saure, D., Kadziola, Z., & 
Welton, N. J. (2020). Multilevel network meta-regression for population-adjusted treatment 
 
29 
 
comparisons. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series A, (Statistics in Society), 183(3), 
1189–1210. https://doi.org/10.1111/rssa.12579 
Polanin, J. R., & Williams, R. T. (2016). Overcoming obstacles in obtaining individual participant data 
for 
meta‐analysis. 
Research 
Synthesis 
Methods, 
7(3), 
333–341. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/jrsm.1208 
Proctor, T., Zimmermann, S., Seide, S., & Kieser, M. (2022). A comparison of methods for enriching 
network meta‐analyses in the absence of individual patient data. Research Synthesis Methods, 
13(6), 745–759. https://doi.org/10.1002/jrsm.1568 
Riley, R. D., Lambert, P. C., Staessen, J. A., Wang, J., Gueyffier, F., Thijs, L., & Boutitie, F. (2008). 
Meta‐analysis of continuous outcomes combining individual patient data and aggregate data. 
Statistics in Medicine, 27(11), 1870–1893. https://doi.org/10.1002/sim.3165 
Röver, C., Bender, R., Dias, S., Schmid, C. H., Schmidli, H., Sturtz, S., Weber, S., & Friede, T. (2021). 
On weakly informative prior distributions for the heterogeneity parameter in Bayesian random‐
effects 
meta‐analysis. 
Research 
Synthesis 
Methods, 
12(4), 
448–474. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/jrsm.1475 
Rücker, G. (2012). Network meta-analysis, electrical networks and graph theory. Research Synthesis 
Methods, 3(4), 312–324. https://doi.org/10.1002/jrsm.1058 
Rücker, G., Cates, C. J., & Schwarzer, G. (2017). Methods for including information from multi‐arm 
trials 
in 
pairwise 
meta‐analysis. 
Research 
Synthesis 
Methods, 
8(4), 
392–403. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/jrsm.1259 
Salanti, G. (2012). Indirect and mixed-treatment comparison, network, or multiple-treatments meta-
analysis: Many names, many benefits, many concerns for the next generation evidence synthesis 
tool. Research Synthesis Methods, 3(2), 80–97. https://doi.org/10.1002/jrsm.1037 
Salanti, G., Higgins, J. P. T., Ades, A. E., & Ioannidis, J. P. A. (2008). Evaluation of networks of 
randomized 
trials. 
Statistical 
Methods 
in 
Medical 
Research, 
17(3), 
279–301. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0962280207080643 
Schmid, C. H., Stark, P. C., Berlin, J. A., Landais, P., & Lau, J. (2004). Meta-regression detected 
associations between heterogeneous treatment effects and study-level, but not patient-level, 
 
30 
 
factors. 
Journal 
of 
Clinical 
Epidemiology, 
57(7), 
683–697. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2003.12.001 
Seide, S. E., Jensen, K., & Kieser, M. (2020). A comparison of Bayesian and frequentist methods in 
random‐effects network meta‐analysis of binary data. Research Synthesis Methods, 11(3), 363–
378. https://doi.org/10.1002/jrsm.1397 
Spineli, L. M. (2022). A Revised Framework to Evaluate the Consistency Assumption Globally in a 
Network 
of 
Interventions. 
Medical 
Decision 
Making, 
42(5), 
637–648. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0272989X211068005 
Thompson, S. G., & Sharp, S. J. (1999). Explaining heterogeneity in meta-analysis: A comparison of 
methods. Statistics in Medicine, 18(20), 2693–2708. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-
0258(19991030)18:20%3C2693::AID-SIM235%3E3.0.CO;2-V 
Turner, R. M., Jackson, D., Wei, Y., Thompson, S. G., & Higgins, J. P. T. (2015). Predictive 
distributions for between-study heterogeneity and simple methods for their application in 
Bayesian 
meta-analysis. 
Statistics 
in 
Medicine, 
34(6), 
984–998. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/sim.6381 
Van Der Worp, H., Holtman, G. A., & Blanker, M. H. (2023). Challenges In Performing An Individual 
Participant–level 
Data 
Meta-analysis. 
European 
Urology 
Focus, 
9(5), 
705–707. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euf.2023.10.012 
Veroniki, A. A., Jackson, D., Viechtbauer, W., Bender, R., Bowden, J., Knapp, G., Kuss, O., Higgins, 
J. P. T., Langan, D., & Salanti, G. (2016). Methods to estimate the between-study variance and 
its 
uncertainty 
in 
meta-analysis. 
Research 
Synthesis 
Methods, 
7(1), 
55–79. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/jrsm.1164 
Viechtbauer, W. (2005). Bias and Efficiency of Meta-Analytic Variance Estimators in the Random-
Effects Model. Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics, 30(3), 261–293. 
https://doi.org/10.3102/10769986030003261 
White, I. R., Barrett, J. K., Jackson, D., & Higgins, J. P. T. (2012). Consistency and inconsistency in 
network meta-analysis: Model estimation using multivariate meta-regression. Research 
Synthesis Methods, 3(2), 111–125. https://doi.org/10.1002/jrsm.1045 
 
31 
 
Yao, M., Mei, F., Zou, K., Li, L., & Sun, X. (2025). Comparison of Prior Distributions for the 
Heterogeneity Parameter in a Rare Events Meta‐Analysis of a Few Studies. Pharmaceutical 
Statistics, 24(2), e2448. https://doi.org/10.1002/pst.2448 
Declarations 
Funding: This project was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German 
Research Foundation) – Project-ID 499552394 – SFB 1597. TE was supported by the Deutsche 
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) under Project ID 554095932. AN has 
received funding from the European Research Executive Agency under the HORIZON TMA MSCA 
Postdoctoral Fellowships - European Fellowships grant agreement 101244226. 
 
